CONTINUING EDUCATION

Review of HIPAA, Part 1: History, Protected Health
Information, and Privacy and Security Rules
Wilnellys Moore, RT (R)(N) (MR)(AART), CNMT, and Sarah Frye, MBA, CNMT, PET NCT, CCRP
Doisy College of Health Sciences, Saint Louis University, St. Louis, Missouri
CE credit: For CE credit, you can access the test for this article, as well as additional JNMT CE tests, online at https://www.snmmilearningcenter.org.
Complete the test online no later than December 2022. Your online test will be scored immediately. You may make 3 attempts to pass the test and must
answer 80% of the questions correctly to receive 1.0 CEH (Continuing Education Hour) credit. SNMMI members will have their CEH credit added to their VOICE
transcript automatically; nonmembers will be able to print out a CE certificate upon successfully completing the test. The online test is free to SNMMI members;
nonmembers must pay $15.00 by credit card when logging onto the website to take the test.

The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)
of 1996 has made an impact on the operation of health-care
organizations. HIPAA includes 5 titles, and its regulations are
complex. Many are familiar with the HIPAA aspects that address
protection of the privacy and security of patients’ medical records. There are new rules to HIPAA that address the implementation of electronic medical records. HIPAA provides rules for
protected health information (PHI) and what should be protected
and secured. The privacy rule regulates the use and disclosure of
PHI and sets standards that an entity working with health data
must follow to protect patients’ private medical information. The
HIPAA security rule complements the privacy rule and requires
entities to implement physical, technical, and administrative safeguards to protect the privacy of PHI. This article—part 1 of a
2-part series—is a refresher on HIPAA, its history, its rules, its
implications, and the role that imaging professionals play.
Key Words: HIPAA; security law; privacy law; patient rights
J Nucl Med Technol 2019; 47:269–272
DOI: 10.2967/jnmt.119.227819

P

rivacy and security laws are continually evolving to
adjust to new challenges, new technologies, and the novel
threats in the digital era. The laws of the Health Insurance
Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) of 1996 are
more strictly enforced than ever before. Although periodic
HIPAA training is mandatory for employees who have access to, or manage, patient data, HIPAA rule violations
continue to occur (1,2). Recent updates and modifications
to HIPAA have strengthened its standards and broadened
the inclusion of who must comply with HIPAA. Fortified
by the Health Information Technology for Economic and

Received Feb. 25, 2019; revision accepted May 7, 2019.
For correspondence or reprints contact: Sarah Frye, Saint Louis University,
Allied Health Building, 3437 Caroline St., Suite 3021, St. Louis, MO 63104.
E-mail: sarah.frye@health.slu.edu
Published online Jun. 10, 2019.
COPYRIGHT © 2019 by the Society of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging.

Clinical Health (HITECH) Act of 2009, and the omnibus
rule of 2013, HIPAA emphasizes compliance with increased
auditing, augmented penalties, and thorough enforcement of
the laws. Staying abreast of these changes and complying with
these laws are imperative to protect health information confidentiality, privacy, and security. This article—part 1 of a 2-part
series—is a refresher on HIPAA, its rules, and its implications.
Part 2 will continue the discussion of HIPAA with a specific
focus on its limitations, privacy and security officers, enforcement, violations, and the role of imaging technologists.
HISTORY

In 1996, the federal government passed a law that created
national standards to protect the confidentiality of medical
records. HIPAA can be found at title 45 of Code of Federal
Regulations parts 160–164. The law was passed by Congress and signed by President Bill Clinton on August 21,
1996, with the primary intent of ensuring portability and continuity of health insurance coverage for millions of Americans;
however, HIPAA entails more than portability, privacy, and
security. HIPAA consists of 5 sections, called titles, in title
45 of Code of Federal Regulations part 164, and the regulations
are complex and voluminous.
THE 5 HIPAA TITLES

Title I provides the ability to transfer and continue
health-care coverage for American workers and their families
who change or lose their jobs; it also limits the ability to deny
health plan coverage due to preexisting conditions (3). Title
II has an administrative simplification provision requiring
that the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
(DHHS) establish national standards for electronic healthcare transactions and national identifiers for providers, health
plans, and employers; it also addresses the security and
privacy of health data and helps prevent health-care fraud
and abuse (3). Title III provides changes to health insurance
laws and deductions for medical insurance, as well as guidelines
for pretax medical spending accounts (3). Title IV specifies
conditions for group health plans regarding coverage of

HIPAA: PART 1 • Moore and Frye

269

persons with preexisting conditions and modifies the continuation-of-coverage requirements (3). Title V includes
provisions related to company-owned life insurance and to
the treatment of individuals without U.S. citizenship (3).
Health-care professionals are most familiar with the
HIPAA title that addresses the protection of the privacy
and security of patients’ medical records. After all, this is
the part of HIPAA on which health-care professionals receive periodic training. Before the introduction of HIPAA,
multiple federal rules and regulations addressed privacy in
various forms, but these rules and regulations lacked clarity
and consistency (1). State and federal requirements differed, and
there was confusion as to which regulations were applicable
in which situations. Congress recognized the need, on a national
level, for privacy and security standards as the use of electronic
technology surged. Patients’ health data needed to be readily
accessible to doctors, nurses, technicians, pharmacies, billing
and coding companies, and administrative staff. There was a
growing need to modernize the flow of medical data to
facilitate and expedite access to health records (1).
The responsibility for implementing the new regulations
that would help maintain the safety of health records was
deferred to the DHHS, which established a schedule for
this implementation (4). These rules and standards apply to
covered entities, which DHHS defines as health-care providers,
health plans, and health-care clearinghouses and business
associates (5). Creating and enacting these general rules took
time because private and government systems needed to be
upgraded, policies and procedures had to be reviewed for
adequacy and applicability, and personnel needed to be trained.
Initially, HIPAA was met with skepticism and confusion
(1,6). Lawmakers and health-care professionals wondered
about its cost-effectiveness, how meaningful the protections
would be, and how these rules could interfere with efficient
patient care (6).
NEW RULES

Although HIPAA was signed into law in 1996, it was not
until 2003 that HIPAA was fully implemented. By that time,
the need for enforcement standards and additional rules
addressing specific privacy issues had been identified (4).
HIPAA grew in prominence after the enactment of the
HITECH Act in 2009 (7). The goal of the HITECH Act was
to support the nationwide implementation of electronic health
records to provide integrated medical data and information to
providers as well as patients. HITECH offered incentive programs that helped to encourage the adoption of electronic health
records by hospitals and other providers while also penalizing
those who were eligible for the incentives but chose not to
implement them (7,8). Additionally, HITECH significantly
increased monetary penalties for HIPAA violations (1).
The surge in medical records collected, archived, and
transmitted electronically led to unprecedented challenges
regarding patient privacy. As a response to these challenges,
DHHS developed changes to HIPAA that addressed subsequent standards and rules. The omnibus final rule was

270

enacted on January 25, 2013, and expanded covered entities
to include business associates, which consist of auditors,
consultants, information technology companies, and others
with whom facilities have agreements involving the use of
protected health information (PHI) (4,5). HIPAA requires that
updated agreements be executed and maintained between the
practice and all business associates (4). A business associate
agreement is a contract that defines how the associates adhere
to HIPAA along with the responsibilities and risks they accept.
Because of the omnibus rules, both covered entities and business associates are subject to the full civil and criminal penalties
for violations of the laws (1,4). The omnibus rule is intended to
strengthen the privacy and security safeguards of patient data.
The enactment of these new rules significantly reduced the
number of privacy breaches among business associates (7).
PHI

PHI includes all information that could be used to identify an individual. Any part of a person’s medical record
and payment history is considered PHI and may not be shared
with unauthorized personnel. PHI is used within a medical
facility and includes verbal and written communications.
PHI can be found in computer files, paper medical records,
information from insurance companies, information from
the provider, and information from legal offices (9). Name,
address, date of birth, phone number, social security number,
medical record number, medical history, photographs, charts,
health plan beneficiary numbers, license numbers, vehicle
identifiers, internet protocol addresses, biometric identifiers
(such as retina, voice, and fingerprints), and test results are
all considered PHI (10). Physicians’ and nurses’ notes, billing
records, and other treatment records are also included. Medical
images are also considered PHI (11).
Medical images exist in DICOM format, which combines
sets of images with patient information and a description of
the radiology modality. Under HIPAA, this type of DICOM
data must also be protected and secured (11).
NEED-TO-KNOW BASIS

Health-care providers have the ethical and legal obligation to maintain the confidentiality of patients’ PHI. It is
also a responsibility to ensure that patient information is
disclosed only to individuals or companies with a legal right
to have it. Health-care professionals should use patient data
only to perform specific job tasks and nothing more—that is,
health-care professionals must use the minimum necessary
information to accomplish the purpose of the request (3).
When there is not a specific rule to follow in a situation or
a question arises, one should also rely on personal ethics and
use the best judgement in deciding whether to disclose PHI.
PRIVACY RULE

In the context of PHI, the term privacy refers to the
obligation of authorized persons using PHI to keep such
information secret. The privacy rule regulates the use and
disclosure of PHI and sets the minimum national standards

JOURNAL OF NUCLEAR MEDICINE TECHNOLOGY • Vol. 47 • No. 4 • December 2019

that every covered entity must follow to protect patients’
private medical information. Under HIPAA guidelines, all
PHI about an individual must remain private and confidential.
The HIPAA privacy rule applies to health plans (e.g., Anthem,
Medicare, and Cigna), health-care clearinghouses (e.g., billing
companies), and health-care providers (e.g., hospitals, clinics,
and doctor’s offices) and their business associates (e.g.,
attorneys and consultants) that conduct health-care transactions. This rule also gives patients the right to request their
own radiographic images and a copy of their health records.
By law, an individual must receive the requested PHI within
30 d after such a request (3).
EXCEPTIONS TO THE PRIVACY RULE

An entity covered under HIPAA may not disclose PHI
unless a patient authorizes its disclosure in writing. However,
HIPAA outlines specific circumstances in which disclosure
of PHI is allowed in the absence of an individual’s written permission. PHI may be disclosed without authorization under certain circumstances:
• For treatment, payment, or general health-care operations. Providers can also share PHI with billing companies to receive payment for services rendered. PHI
can also be used to perform system or compliance quality
checks that improve health-care operations (12). Under HIPAA, only 2 types of clinical care information
cannot be shared between care providers without the
patient’s explicit consent: substance-abuse records from
a licensed abuse program and written psychotherapy
notes (13,14).
• If the patient can agree to or object to a disclosure. For
example, when a patient brings another person into the
room with him or her, the patient automatically agrees
that that person can hear the PHI (6,15).
• During a natural disaster. For example, some violation
penalties were waived during Hurricane Harvey in 2017
after the disaster protocol was implemented in Texasand Louisiana-area hospitals. The waiver is granted by
the U.S. president or a state official and it applies only
to hospitals in the disaster area for the emergency
period identified in the public health emergency declaration and for up to 72 h after implementation of a hospital’s disaster protocol. The waiver does not apply to all
elements of the privacy rule, and these provisions are
usually stated in the official waiver (3,12,16).
• For public health activities and purposes, such as preventing or controlling the spread of disease or receiving reports of child abuse or neglect (12).
• If requested to do so by court orders (3,12).

and requires entities to implement physical, technical, and administrative safeguards to protect the privacy of PHI.
Physical Safeguards

Physical security refers to physical access to PHI, including
access to a location or physical object such as a building, office,
secured area, computer, or file. Facility access must be
authorized, created, and monitored, as well as terminated
for individuals who are no longer with the organization. Incoming and outgoing equipment such as copiers and electrocardiogram machines must be inspected before removal from
the facility and inventoried. Just like passwords, access badges
should not be shared or left unattended. It is important to
control and monitor personnel accessing secure areas, and
security measures must be put into place (3).
Technical Safeguards

Technical security refers to control of access to computer systems and protection of electronically transmitted
PHI (3). Technical security addresses who has access to
electronic medical records and how a person may access,
view and use such records. PHI must be secured when it is
being transferred to another location (10). Through encryption,
data are always to be unreadable until a password is entered. Many entities use a third-party program that encrypts
e-mail text. This protection goes above what password protection alone can do. As a general rule, free and public web
e-mail services such as Outlook, Gmail, and Yahoo are not
secure for the transmission of PHI. There are cloud-based
e-mail platforms that host a HIPAA-compliant server (e.g.,
Office 365); however, this option does not control e-mail
transmission from the cloud server to the e-mail recipient.
Therefore, the best option is to avoid sending e-mails containing PHI altogether. Instead, use patient portals to relay information containing PHI. Many electronic health record
systems can provide this service.
Technical safeguards require facilities to implement
procedures, software, and equipment to protect PHI.
Facilities should incorporate encryption and decryption in
backing up, restoring, and transmitting electronic patient
information (10). Policies and procedures must be set up to
destroy PHI when it is no longer necessary to fulfill a job or
function. Disposal of documents that contain PHI must be
handled correctly. DHHS identifies shredding, burning,
pulping, or pulverizing as acceptable methods to render
paper records unreadable and indecipherable (17). For electronic data, overwriting media with nonsensitive data,
degaussing, shredding, or incinerating are all acceptable
and effective practices (17). DHHS encourages organizations
to consider which methods are most practical and appropriate
for each facility (17).

SECURITY RULE

Administrative Safeguards

In the context of PHI, security refers to procedures
designed to prevent unauthorized persons from accessing
PHI. The HIPAA security rule complements the privacy rule

Administrative safeguards require facilities to create and
update policies and procedures for employees to learn and
follow to help ensure the security of PHI. Some examples

HIPAA: PART 1 • Moore and Frye

271

of administrative safeguards are acceptable-use policies to
train employees on their access rights and responsibilities
in handling PHI; sanction policies to discipline employees
who violate HIPAA; information access policies to grant
appropriate access to computer workstations, health records, health transactions, and other programs or processes;
security awareness training to educate and remind employees of policies and procedures related to software updates,
computer log-in monitoring, password updates, and other
critical security measures; and contingency planning to
ensure adequate preparation for emergencies such as cyber
attacks, fire, vandalism, or natural disasters, including having
policies and procedures in place to respond appropriately to
such emergencies. All critical activities must have designated
organizers so that each employee knows what is expected in
the event of an emergency (18).
CONCLUDING RECOMMENDATIONS

Each facility is responsible for using the necessary safeguards to ensure compliance with HIPAA regarding the
privacy and security of PHI. Employers should ensure that
employees are adequately trained and following HIPAA
requirements. HIPAA compliance includes more than just
not talking about PHI in an elevator. Make sure business
associates can be trusted and have updated business associate
agreements. Remember that authorized personnel who handle
PHI are responsible for protecting it. Each facility must be
committed to developing a culture of HIPAA compliance.
Organizations need to ensure a knowledgeable workforce that
understands the new HIPAA rules. It is important for employers
to be proactive rather than reactive. Part 2 of this series,
which will appear in a future issue of this journal, will go
further into the HIPAA limitations, patient rights, compliance,
violations, and the role that imaging technologists play.
DISCLOSURE

No potential conflict of interest relevant to this article was
reported.

272

REFERENCES
1. Solove DJ. HIPAA turns 10. J AHIMA. 2013;84:22–28.
2. 45 CFR 164.530. Govinfo website. https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/CFR2017-title45-vol1/pdf/CFR-2017-title45-vol1-sec164-530.pdf. Accessed August 15,
2019.
3. Edemekong P, Haydel M. Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
(HIPAA). Treasure Island, FL: StatPearls Publishing; 2018.
4. Morris K. Sing a song of HIPAA. Ohio Nurses Rev. 2013;88:12–14.
5. 45 CFR 164.104. Govinfo website. https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/CFR2011-title45-vol1/pdf/CFR-2011-title45-vol1-sec164-104.pdf. Accessed August 15,
2019.
6. Marting R. HIPAA: Answers to Your Frequently Asked Questions. Fam Pract
Manag. 2018;25:12–16.
7. Yaraghi N, Gopal RD. The role of HIPAA omnibus rules in reducing the frequency of medical data breaches: insights from an empirical study. Milbank Q.
2018;96:144–166.
8. Index for Excerpts from the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(ARRA). HeathIT.gov website. https://www.healthit.gov/sites/default/files/hitech_
act_excerpt_from_arra_with_index.pdf. Published February 19, 2009. Accessed
October 29, 2019.
9. 45 CFR 164.502. Govinfo website. https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/CFR-2016title45-vol1/pdf/CFR-2016-title45-vol1-sec164-502.pdf. Accessed August 15, 2019.
10. Disclosures for emergency preparedness - a decision tool: limited data set (LDS).
Department of Health and Human Services website. https://www.hhs.gov/hipaa/
for-professionals/special-topics/emergency-preparedness/limited-data-set/index.html.
Updated June 16, 2017. Accessed August 15, 2019.
11. HIPAA Compliance & Medical Imaging. Quest International website. https://
www.questinc.com/company/blog-posts/hipaa-compliance-medical-imaging. Updated
October 2018. Accessed October 29, 2019.
12. Annual report to Congress on breaches of unsecured protected health information
for calendar years 2013 and 2014. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
website. https://www.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/rtc-breach-20132014.pdf. Accessed
August 15, 2019.
13. 45 CFR 164.501. Govinfo website. https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/CFR-2011title45-vol1/pdf/CFR-2011-title45-vol1-sec164-501.pdf. Accessed August 15, 2019.
14. Hilt RJ. HIPAA: still misunderstood after all these years. Pediatr Ann. 2014;
43:249.
15. 45 CFR 164.510. Govinfo website. https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/CFR2017-title45-vol1/pdf/CFR-2017-title45-vol1-sec164-510.pdf. Accessed August 15,
2019.
16. HIPAA privacy rule violation penalties waved in wake of Hurricane Harvey. NetSec.
news website. https://www.netsec.news/hipaa-privacy-rule-violation-penaltieswaived-wake-hurricane-harvey/. Published August 28, 2017. Accessed August 15,
2019.
17. What do the HIPAA privacy and security rules require of covered entities when they
dispose of protected health information? Department of Health and Human Services
website. https://www.hhs.gov/hipaa/for-professionals/faq/575/what-does-hipaarequire-of-covered-entities-when-they-dispose-information/index.html. Published February
18, 2009. Accessed August 15, 2019.
18. 45 CFR 164.308. Govinfo website. https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/CFR-2010title45-vol1/pdf/CFR-2010-title45-vol1-sec164-308.pdf. Accessed August 15, 2019.

JOURNAL OF NUCLEAR MEDICINE TECHNOLOGY • Vol. 47 • No. 4 • December 2019

