Privacy of Medical Records:
IT Implications of HIPAA
David Baumer, Ph.D., riD.; Julia Brande Earp, Ph.D.; Fay Cobb Payton, Ph.D.
DepartmentofBusinessManagement,
North CarolinaState Uniwersitv
David_Baumer,julia_earp,Jhy__payton@ncsu.edu

Abstract: Increasingly, medical records are being stored in computer databases that allow for
efficiencies in providing treatment and in the processing of clinical and financial services.
Computerization of medical records has also diminished patient privacy and, in particular, has
increased the potential for misuse, especially in the form of nonconsensual secondary use of
personally identifiable records. Organizations that store and use medical records have had to
establish security measures, prompted partially by an inconsistent patchwork of legal standards
that vary from state to state. There is widespread appreciation among policy makers regarding
the need for legal reform. The Health Information and Portability Accountability Act of 1996
mandated that the Administration develop regulations regarding the control of medical records.
The Administration has offered regulations from the Department of Health and Human Services (Standards for Privacy of Individually Identifiable Health Information; Proposed Rule 45
CFR Parts 160 through 164). Survey data reveal what healthcare professionals who have access
to sensitive medical records believe are the greatest threats to patients' privacy. The overlap
between Administration proposals and the responses of healthcare professionals is striking.

I. Introduction

records.6 The healthcare provider, whose employees are the
Passage of the Health Insurance and Portability Accountabil- respondents for the survey, will be regulated under the HHS
ity Act (HIPAA) in 1996 required the Clinton Administra- Rule discussed in this paper. We compare the
tion, via the Office of Health and Human Services (HHS), Administration's proposed regulations (the HHS Rule) with
to compose uniform standards for electronic exchanges of the survey responses of those who have access to medical
health information if Congress failed to enact a comprehen- records. There is a strong correlation between what healthcare
sive privacy act by August 21,1999. 1When Congress failed workers regard as objectionable and what is outlawed by the
to act by the August 1999 deadline, HHS responded with proposed HHS Rule.
proposed regulations on November 3, 1999.2 We examine
the regulations offered by the Department of Health and
Human Services (HHS) (Standards for Privacy of Individu- II. Background of the Privacy Debate
ally Identifiable Health Information; Proposed Rule 45 CFR Regarding the Privacy of Individually
Parts 160 through 164), which became law, February 21, Identifiable Medical Records
2000.3 These regulations, however, do not preempt current
state laws that provide greater protection for the privacy of
A. Current Federal Protection for the Privacy of Medical
medical records.4
As might be expected, there are numerous controversies Records
on both sides of the privacy debate. Some think that the Legal protection for the privacy of medical records is a crazy
protections contained in the proposed records are inadequate, patchwork that is in desperate need of reform.7 To date there
while others contend that privacy safeguards will erode the is no federal statute that protects the bulk of personally idenefficiencies that computerized medical records create, im- tifiable medical records. The Americans with Disabilities
pede medical research and, in some cases, interfere with law Act (ADA) and the Privacy Act of 1974 provide some proenforcement.5 We (Drs. Earp and Payton) conducted a sur- tection under some circumstances.8 Also for government
vey of healthcare workers at a healthcare provider whose employees, the Fourth Amendment requires a showing of
employees have access to personally identifying medical probable cause when their employer (the government) searches

40

Computersand Society, December 2000

their medical records. For the vast bulk of medical records,
however, there is currently little or no effective legal protection for the privacy of individually identifiable medical information at the federal level.9 When medical records are
not protected a number of abuses can and do take place
including:
* unauthorized secondary use of medical records,
* inaccuracies that are not corrected,
* discovery and disclosure of medical records by hackers
and commercial vendors,
* use of medical records by employers for employment
decisions, and
* revelation of medical records by employees of insurance companies, who may be among our neighbors and
who do not have medical training.
The Privacy Act of 1974 provides some protection for
medical records that are held by federal agencies, but does
not cover medical records held by private groups where most
of the medical records are created and stored. 10 Likewise,
the Privacy Act has numerous exceptions so that its protection is leaky at best. In its time, the Privacy Act was heralded as a huge step forward, but currently it has been labeled as the "most outdated" privacy act in the world. I1
Some protection for medical records is also contained in
the American with Disabilities Act (ADA) of 1990, which
outlaws discrimination based on disabilities. As long as a
disabled person can perform the essential functions of the
job, employers cannot refuse to hire an applicant based on
disability and must make reasonable accommodations for
them to perform the job functions. The protection for medical records of employees under ADA is also filled with loopholes. First, the ADA does not protect the medical records
of those who are not defined under the Act as "disabled." If
the employee is considered "disabled", according to one of
the three criteria detailed in the ADA, disclosure of medical
records is permitted when:
(1) the supervisor needs to be informed regarding the
necessary restrictions on the duties of the employee,
(2) when the employer's medical staff needs to be informed for purposes of emergency treatment, and
(3) when government officials seeking to determine compliance with the ADA.12
A recent case illustrates the vulnerability of employees
who are considered disabled under the ADA. In Doe v.
SEPTA a self-insured, public employer hired Pierce to audit
medications taken by employees to determine if waste and
fraud were taking place.13 Doe was infected with the AIDS
virus and was reluctant to apply for benefits under the company plan because he feared detection. Doe specifically asked
company officials whether Pierce would have access to his
records and was told by the company that there was no need
for Pierce to match Doe's name with the treatment he was
receiving. Nevertheless, Pierce did match Doe's name up
with his prescriptions and soon Doe's supervisor and co-

workers learned of his condition. Doe sued under 42 ~ U.S.C.
1983 for deprivation of his constitutional right to privacy,
but after winning at the District Court level, Doe lost a Court
of Appeals decision, which held that the greater good outweighed Doe's privacy concerns. Pierce had saved SEPTA
more than $42,000,000 in medical and dental bills, and the
court indicated that the benefits of Pierce's actions, "outweighs the minimal intrusion into Doe's privacy." 14
B. Privacy Protection at the State Level

Much of the legal protection for the privacy of medical
records occurs at the state level. Unfortunately, there is no
uniformity across state jurisdictions so that compliance with
state statutes by those creating, storing and using medical
records is difficult given the wide disparities in protection.
To add to the confusion, plaintiffs in medical disclosure cases
must rely on state common law claims that are riddled with
anomalies and exceptions. In 30 of the 50 states invasion of
privacy by the unreasonable publicity given to the private
facts of a person's life is actionable.15 Attempts to fashion
uniform state laws regarding medical records have been a
spectacular failure. To date, only two states have adopted the
Uniform Healthcare Information Act (UHCIA).16 The
UHCIA itself only applies to healthcare providers and does
not apply to third parties such as insurers and claims processors. The National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) has endorsed the Health Information Privacy
Model Act, but this bill does not apply to healthcare providers.17
C. Impact of Technology
The debate regarding the privacy of medical records has
been sharpened by several long-term trends. First, there is
intense pressure to contain costs of medical treatment, not
only among Medicare patients, but also by private insurers
and employer health plans. There is increased scrutiny by
third-party payers of medical treatments, tests and all kinds
of psychiatric care. HMOs are caught in middle between
the demands of patients for appropriate medical treatment
and the costs they can recover from private and public insurers. Computerization of medical records can yield significant savings, but with it comes increased opportunities for
disturbing disclosures. Second, much of the current privacy
protection is based on paper records, which are being replaced by computerized files. The laws that were adequate
for paper records are often inadequate to provide protection
for computerized records. Computerized medical records
are much more amenable to abuse on a much larger scale.
Additionally, the exposure to detection of snoopy employees
and others with access to medical files is much less when
operating through a computer, than when they have to access paper records stored in visible file cabinets. The impacts of security breaches of company protocols that inadequately protect stored records are much more significant

Computers and Society, December 2000

41

than with paper records. Third, as technology progresses,
the potential for more intrusions into personal medical records
will grow, particularly in the area of DNA testing. The potential use of DNA test results by insurers and employers to
exclude "undesirables" from risk pools is becoming more
and more evident.18

D. Need for Reform
There is general recognition that legal protection for the privacy of medical records is inadequate and disorganized. The
debate about the privacy of medical records pits, privacy
advocates and patients, against insurers, healthcare providers, public health organizations, researchers, law enforcement, government agencies, educational institutions and many
others. Not surprisingly, each special interest has a rationale
as to why it deserves access to personally identifiable medical records without obtaining consent of patients.
In some cases, personally identifiable medical records
are sold to commercial interests (often at large profits) for
direct marketing campaigns. Given the large amounts of revenue at stake, health organizations that are often labeled,
"pro-patient" are enticed to traffic in sales of such information. 19

E. Fair Information Principles
The basic building blocks of federal confidentiality law are
not in dispute. In the Geocities case, the Federal Trade Commission prosecuted a business that maintained a website that
collected information from website visitors.20 Following the
Geocities decision, the FTC issued a report, which stated
its views on fair information principles.21 According to the
FTC privacy report, there are generally accepted fair information principles that all websites (and repositories for medical information) should subscribe to:
(1) Notice/Awareness-consumers (patients) should be
notified as to who is gathering the data and the uses that will
be made of that data.
(2) Choice/Consent-consumers (patients) should consent
to any secondary use for the data. There should be opt-in
and opt-out provisions.
(3) Access/Participation-consumers (patients) should have
the right to contest the accuracy of the data collected.
(4) Integrity/Security-there should be managerial mechanisms in place to guard against loss, unauthorized access, or
disclosures of the data.
(5) Enforcement/Redress-there should be remedies available to victims of information misuse. The FTC envisions
self-regulation by industry groups, private rights of action
based on invasion of privacy, and government enforcement
as in the Geocities case.
There is, however, considerable debate as to how to translate these principles into practice. Healthcare advocates of
privacy question the need for circulation of individually identifiable data beyond that necessary for healthcare providers

42

Computersand Society, December 2000

and treatment. Others involved in the healthcare sector favor exceptions for various reasons. Among the exceptions
are: facilitation of approvals and third-party payment systems, medical research, and desires of public healthcare associations. Hospitals, insurers, claims agents, managed care
organizations, health researchers and law enforcement view
the sharing of healthcare information as essential to the efficient functioning of the healthcare system.22 These groups
desire uniform federal laws that are understandable and which
eliminate obstacles, including consent of the patients, to the
sharing of healthcare information.

III. Department of Health and Human
Services: Standards for Privacy of Individually
Identifiable Health Information; Proposed Rule
In an effort to deal comprehensively with the issue of privacy of medical records, HHS developed a proposed Rule
that occupied 145 pages of the Federal Register on November 3, 1999.
A. Making the Case for Additional Privacy Standards
According to the HHS proposed regulations, under the title
Need for Privacy Standards,
The maintenance and exchangeof individuallyidentifiablehealth
information is an integral component of the deliveryof quality
healthcare. In order to receive accurate and reliable diagnosis
and treatment patients must provide healthcare professionals
with accurate, detailed information about their personal health,
behavior, and other aspects of their lives. Healthcare providers,
health plans and healtheare clearinghouses also rely on the provision of such information to accurately and promptly process
claims for payment and for other administrative fimctions that
directly affect a patient's ability to received needed care, the
quality of that care, and the efficiency with which it is delivered."23
The foregoing statement by HHS recognizes (1) that effective medical care requires transfer of medical (and other)
information from patient to healthcare professionals and (2)
that other health organizations have legitimate needs to access healthcare information to facilitate payments and enhance treatment. According to the HHS, "Efforts to provide
legal protection against the inappropriate use of individually
identifiable health information has been, to date, undertaken
primarily by the States,"24 Further, HHS states that, "The
number of entities maintaining and transmitting individually identifiable health information has increased significantly
over the last 10 years...[t]he expanded use of electronic information has had clear benefits for patients and the healthcare
system as a whole."25 Finally, according to HHS, "The absence of national standards for the confidentiality of health
information has, however, made the healthcare industry and
the population in general uncomfortable about this prima-

rily financially driven expansion in the use of electronic
data.'26

B. Statutory Background
According to HHS regulations, "section 262 [of HIPAA]
directs HHS to issue standards to facilitate the electronic
exchange of information with respect to financial and administrative transactions carried out by health plans,
healthcare clearinghouses, and healthcare providers who transmit electronically in connection with such transactions."27
Also the regulations recite Section 264(c)(i) of the HIPAA
which provides that:
If legislation governing standards with respect to the privacy of
individually identifiable health information transmitted in connection with the transactions described in section 117 l(a) of
the Social SecurityAct (as added by section 262) is not enacted
by (August 22, 1999), the Secretary of Health and Human
Servicesshall promulgate final regulations containing such standards not later than (February 21,2000).28
Since Congress did not enact such legislation, HHS is
required to act. Among the goals of the proposed HHS standards are:
* Allow for the smooth flow of identifiable health information for treatment, payment and related operations,
and for purposes related to healthcare that are in the
public interest.
* Prohibit the flow of identifiable information for any
additional purposes, unless specifically and voluntarily
authorized by the subject of the information.
* Put into place a set of fair information practices that
allow individuals to know who is using their health information and how it is being used.
* Establish fair information practices that allow individuals
to obtain access to their records and request amendment of inaccurate information.
* Require persons who hold identifiable health information to safeguard that information from inappropriate
use or disclosure.
* Hold those who use individually identifiable health information accountable for their handling of this information, and to provide legal recourse to persons harmed
by misuse.29
Clearly, these goals have much in common with the report by the Federal Trade Commission that discusses Fair
Information Principles following the GeoCities action.

C. Limitations and Protections Contained in HHS
Proposed Regulations
Although the report of HHS recommends that, "'everyone
in this chain of information handling be covered by the same
rules.' HIPAA limits HHS authority to covered entities, which
include health plans, healthcare clearinghouses and any
healthcare provider who transmits health information in dec-

tronic form..."30 "In particular, the proposed regulation does
not directly cover many of the persons who obtain identifiable health information from the covered entities."31 HHS,
however, attempts to expand their authority by requiring
those receiving health records to apply the same fair information principles as the covered entities. Those receiving
protected healthcare information from a covered entity may
be classified as "business partners."
The basic thrust of the HHS Rule is to prohibit covered
entities from using or disclosing protected health information except as provided in the proposed rule. Covered entities could use or disclose protected health information without authorization (from the patient) for treatment, payment
and healthcare operations.32 Covered entities would be allowed to disclose healthcare information without authorization only in very narrowly specified public health and public
policy-related purposes, "including public health, research,
health oversight, law enforcement..." According to HHS, "A
central aspect of this proposal is the principle of 'minimum
necessary' disclosure."33

D. Permissible Uses and Disclosures for Purposes Other
Than Treatment, Payment and Heath Care Operations
Although the proposed HHS rule adheres to a 'minimum
necessary' disclosure principle, it does elucidate a long list of
exceptions to the requirement to obtain individual authorization before disclosure of medical records. Most of these
exceptions are based on public policy considerations, but
the terms are potentially very elastic. Much of the controversy involves the details of the exceptions to the general
principles of privacy that require individual authorization
for secondary use of medical information. HHS considered
permitting only those disclosures required by law, but decided that these exceptions are so important to public health
and other purposes, that some unauthorized secondary disclosures should be permitted.34 Although the sale of medical records for commercial purposes is not included among
the exceptions, secondary use of the information might, and
probably will, take place. The following sections describe
some of the exceptions for disclosure without individual authorization.
1. Public Health Activities

The HHS Rule proposes to allow disclosure of medical
records without individual authorization by covered entities
for purposes of, "carrying out public health activities authorized by law, to non-governmental entities authorized by law
to carry out public health activities, and to persons who may
be at risk of contracting or spreading a disease (when other
law authorizes notification)."35 The (HSS) Rule goes on to
note that the covered entity could also be a public health
agency and the same rules would apply. The Rule indicates
that traditional public health activity to combat the spread of
communicable diseases is so important that individual inter-

Computersand Society, December2000

4.3

ests in privacy are overridden by community interests. If the
HHS rule interfered with the transmission of such information, it would require major changes in the ordinary practices of public health officials and would potentially expose
people to communicable diseases.

2. Disclosurej~r Health Oversight Purposes
Chief among health oversight purposes are, "combating fraud
in the healthcare industry, ensuring nondiscrimination, and
improving quality of care..." according to the HHS Rule.36
According to HHS, "[O]versight activities are a national
priority in part because of the losses in the healthcare system
due to error and abuse..." which the HHS Office of Inspector General estimates at about 7 percent.37 The Rule indicates that much of the work can be done with statistical tests
that do not require disclosure of individual records without
authorization, not all of the oversight activities can be carried in that manner.

3. Use3~r Judicial and Administrative Proceedings and jar
Use by Coroners and Medical Examiners
The HHS Rule envisions disclosures in personal injury and
medical malpractice cases, "in which the medical condition
of a person is at issue..." and a judicial or administrative
proceeding is taking place to determine the cause of the
injury or medical condition.38 The HHS Rule indicates these
disclosures, "are clearly necessary to allow the smooth functioning of the legal system."39 In addition, the HHS rule
would allow disclosure of medical records to coroners and
medical examiners.40 Again, public interest in determining
causes of death is cited as well as the disclosure requirement
by state law.

4. Disclosures to Law En~brcement
The HHS Rule would permit unauthorized secondary disclosure of individually identifiable medical records if the request by law enforcement is pursuant to judicial or administrative process. In addition, disclosure of medical information to law enforcement could occur without a search warrant if the disclosures by covered entities were given in good
faith for fraud detection or to reveal a criminal action. The
disclosure of healthcare information under this exception
would generally be pursuant to a search warrant, absent exigent circumstances.41 HHS admits that it has not figured
out all of the boundaries of appropriate releases to law enforcement.

5. Government Health Data Systems and Health Directories
HHS proposes to allow secondary use of protected health
information without individual authorization if the disclosure is, "authorized by State or other law to support policy,
planning, regulatory, or management functions."42 According to HHS governmental (including federal) examination of
individually identifiable health data plays an essential role in
44

Computersand Society, December 2000

examining the effectiveness of various policies. Moreover, if
such transfers of information were prohibited, then HIPAA
would negatively impact ongoing procedures that are routinely used by governments to evaluate policies that require
detailed information that can only be obtained by examining
protected health information. Unless the patient objects, the
HHS Rule proposes to allow a health facility to include patients in a directory. For those patients who are not disabled
at the time, the HHS Rule would require the facility to obtain information from the patient. The patient could specify
to the health facility who would be entitled to receive the
protected health information and who would not be so entitled.

6. Disclosure]~r Banking and Payment Purposes
According to the HHS Rule, checks and credit card payments of necessity will disclose protected health information.43 The HHS contends that, "Failure to allow this kind
of disclosure of protected health information would impede
the efficient operations of the healthcare system."44 Recognizing what is likely to become commonplace in the future,
the Rule states that, "We understand that financial institutions may also provide covered entities that accept payment
via credit card with software that, in addition to fields for
information to process the transaction, includes blank fields
in which health plans or healthcare providers may enter any
type of information regarding their patients, such as diagnostic and treatment information, or other information that
the covered entity wished to track and analyze."45 Going
further, the HHS Rule suggests that banks could become,
"business partners of covered entities in accordance with
and subject to the conditions of ~ 164.506(e)."46 By becoming business partners of a covered entity, banks would
become subject to the same prohibitions regarding protected
health information as the covered entities.

7. Medical Research
HHS permits covered entities to disclose (to entities pursuing medical research) protected medical information without authorization as long as, "the covered entity receives
documentation that the research protocol has been reviewed
by an Institutional Review Board or equivalent body-a privacy board-and that the board found that the research protocol meets specified criteria (regarding protected health information) designed to protect the subject."47 In the absence of such documentation, medical researchers would have
to obtain permission from the individuals who supplied the
information, i.e., the patient. HHS stresses the importance
of medical research that has led to many breakthroughs that
have had dramatic impacts on the nation's health.

E. Concluding Thoughts about the Proposed HHS Rule
The absolutist wing of privacy lobby would limit secondary
use of individually identifiable to situations in which indi-

vidual authorization has been obtained. On the other hand, O all relate to requests by their employer to gather informaat present, there is no overall protection for the privacy of tion from patients. There are three variations of the same
privately held medical information that is individually iden- statement, which is, "I am troubled by requests from my
tifiable. The Administration's approach, through the HHS employer to gather information from patients." The response
Rule, is to split the difference between nearly a complete data clearly indicate that healthcare workers are not troubled
absence of protection and prohibitions on distribution of by the gathering of information from patients. Part of this
medical information for purposes other than treatment (the lack of concern could, of course, be motivated by self-interabsolutist approach). Reasonable people can disagree about est since knowledge by healthcare workers of any communiwhether the proposed HHS Rule achieves its objective of cable diseases will enable them to take preventive measures.
"the minimum disclosure required".
In addition, more knowledge of medical and other condiThe Administration's regulations would allow for unau- tions of the patents enables healthcare workers presumably
thorized disclosure of medical information, not only for treat- to better evaluate and treat patients.
ment, but also for payment and healthcare operations. The
second goal of the Administration's Rule is to require indi- C. Accuracy of Records
vidual authorization for secondary uses of medical informa- Statement G essentially says that their employer should never
tion that is individually identifiable. The HHS Rule, how- use information given by patients for any other reason than
ever, allows for a lengthy list of exceptions to the require- medical treatment. The average response of 4.28 indicates
ment for individual authorization for secondary use of the that healthcare workers were undecided about that statement.
protected medical information. Most of these exceptions The word, "never" seems too strong in this context. Rereflect commercial practices within the healthcare industry sponses to statements H, B, L, and F all concern the accucurrently extant. Most of the exceptions are justified on public racy of the files containing medical records. Some variations
policy grounds from prevention of the spread of communi- of the statement suggest that their employer should devote
cable diseases, to detection of fraud, facilitating the justice more time and resources to making sure that the records are
system, and medical research where obtaining permission accurate. The response data indicate that healthcare workers
adds significantly to costs.
recognize that the accuracy of medical files is a problem and
that more resources should be devoted to enhancing the acIV. Views of Healthcare Workers Who Have curacy of these records.

Access to Medical Records
A recent survey by Earp and Payton reveals the concerns of
healthcare workers regarding the privacy of medical
records.48 In order to be eligible to take the survey, the
respondent had to be a healthcare worker who had access to
patient records. The survey was administered to a diverse
group of 163 respondents (133 females, 30 males, 114 whites,
40 African-Americans, 9 Hispanics) who have extensive experience in healthcare (average number of years in healthcare
10.6, average age 44.6, and average number of years with
current employer 5.2).

A. Frequency Data
The survey data consist of the responses of healthcare workers to statements made about healthcare issues involving privacy, access to, uses made of, and the accuracy of medical
records. The survey instrument and response data are available in the Appendix as well as some descriptive statistics.
The responses varied from 1 to 7, with 1 indicating strong
disagreement with the statement and 7 indicating strong
agreement.

B. Gathering Patient Information
In Table 1 of the Appendix, survey data are arranged according to weighted-average responses to the statements in the
questionnaire, from lowest to highest. Statements E, A, and

D. Access to Records
Statements N, I and D refer to access to patient records by
others, not including the patient. Survey responses indicate
that healthcare workers are very cognizant about possible
abuses in the form of unauthorized or inappropriate access
to medical records that contain personal information.
Healthcare workers appear very concerned about the inappropriate and unauthorized access to medical records that is
made possible by computerized medical records maintained
by their employer. Note that it is much less obvious for a
healthcare worker or others to invade the privacy of computerized medical records than for the same person to rummage through paper records in file cabinets. On a scale that
varies between 1 and 7, the average response across statements N, I, and D was 5.94 agreeing with the statement that
unauthorized and inappropriate access to personal medical
records is a serious problem.

E. Unauthorized Secondary Use
Statements C, M, and K all refer to unauthorized secondary
access and use of personal medical records. Again, using the
same scale, the average response was 6.36 condemning unauthorized secondary use of patient information. Probably
the greatest source of resentment among patients is that vendors in the medical sector will somehow access their medical records and that they will be targeted for marketing cam-

Computers and Society, December 2000

45

paigns based on what is in their medical files. Note that the
highest agreement among healthcare professionals with access to medical records is for the statement that their employer, "should never sell the patient information in its computer databases to other companies."

E Implications of Analysis of Frequency Data
Based on the frequency data it seems fair to say that:
* Healthcare professionals do not regard the gathering of
patient information as an abuse or source of concern.
* Healthcare workers recognize that information received
from patients may sometimes be required for purposes
other than treatment.
* There are significant concerns among healthcare workers about the accuracy of medical files and that employers should do more to improve accuracy of medical
records.
* There are also very significant concerns among
healthcare workers about inappropriate and unauthorized access to medical records.
* Healthcare workers take most seriously unauthorized
secondary use of medical information. The most egregious abuse, in the view of healthcare workers, occurs
when a company sells computerized medical files for
money.

G. Factor Analysis
A factor analysis reveals much the same results. Based on the
factor loadings the following four variables were created (in
order of significance): Errors (concern about the accuracy of
patient medical records), Unauthorized Secondary Use, Improper Access, and Collection (of data).

V.

Conclusion

Most major advances in technology also entail unintended
consequences. As computerized medical records have enabled healthcare providers to efficiently gather and evaluate
medical information, via modern database and database-enabled technologies, the potential for misuse of this information has also increased. Among the major players in the health
sector are insurers, employers, hospitals, pharmaceutical
companies, healthcare researchers, public health administrators, vendors of medical equipment, various levels of government, medical researchers, law enforcement, and of course,
healthcare providers. Each of these players has there own
rationale as to why they are entitled to individually identifiable medical records. In most cases, the rationale put forward by these groups are well-thought out, but the combined
impact is one that leaves patients feeling exposed as too many
people are seeing patients' medical records.
The principles of fair use of information have been agreed
upon for at least 25 years. Implementation, however, has
been contentious because various groups argue that there

46

Computersand Society, December 2000

should be exceptions. The most fundamental principle of
fair use of information is that no secondary use of medical
information should take place unless authorized by the patient. The HHS Rule, promulgated by the Clinton Administration, allows numerous exceptions to this principle based
on public health policy considerations, commercial practices,
and state laws. Although the proposed regulations of HHS
allow for exceptions to the principles of fair use of information, they still represent a major step forward in protecting
medical records.
Healthcare workers are on the frontlines of the privacy
battle. They know that the gathering of information is essential effective treatment and for processing claims. Healthcare
workers also know that these medical records are not always
accurate and that too many have access to these records.
Finally, healthcare workers know there is something inherently wrong about unauthorized secondary use of medical
information that does not involve treatment, payment, or
operations and that the sale of medical information without
authorization should be prohibited. •
Notes:
1 42 U.S.C.A.1320d to d-8 (West Supp. 1998).
2 Federal Register 59918 et seq., Dept. of Health and Human Services, Office of the
Secretary, 45 CFR Parts 160 through 164, Standards for Privacy of Individually
Identifiable Health Information, (November 3, 1999), (hereinafter Fed. Reg.)
3 Fed. Reg. 59921.
4 Fed. Reg. 59926. The essence of the proposed federal Rule is that it would provide
a floor for the privacy of medical records. The Rule is not intended to replace state
common law or statutory laws affecting privacy.
5 Bartley L. Barefoot, Enacting a Heath Information Confidentiality Law: Can
Congress Beat the Deadline?, 77 N.C.L. Rev. 283 (1998).
6 Earp and Payton, Information Privacy Concerns Facing Healthcare Organizations in
the New Millennium, under reviewat theJournal of American Medical Information
Association.
7 Barefoot, 1998..
8 42 U.S.C. 12112 (1994); 5 U.S.C. 552a (1994).
9 HHS notes that, "Efforts to provide legal protection against the inappropriate use of
individually identifiable health information have been, to date, undertaken primarily
by the States." Fed. Reg. 59919-20.

10 5 u.s.c. 552a(1994).
11 Barefoot,294.
12 42 U.S.C. ~ 12112(c)(3)(B).
13 73 F.3d1133(3rdCir. 1995).
14 Id., at 1143.
15 Causesof action in the other 20 statesfor disclosureof medicalrecordsare
unknownto theauthors.'l~vomey,LABORANDEMPLOYMENTLAW,584.
In 22 statespatientsdo not havethe rightto viewtheirown medicalrecords,
CNN BroadcastofCongressionalHearingsregardingHHS Rule,February17,
2000.
16 Barefoot304.
17 [d., 305.
18 Mark A. Rothstein, Betsy D. Gelb, and Steven G. Craig, Protecting Genetic Privacy
by Permitting Employer AccessOnly to Job-Related Employee Medical Information:
Analysis of a Unique Minnesota Law, 24 Am. J. L. and Med. 399 (1998).
19 Barefoot 288.
20 Geocities; Analysis to Aid Public Comment,Thursday, August 20, 1998, 63 Federal
Register
44624 AGENCY: Federal Trade Commission
21 www.ftc.gov/reports/privacy3/index.htm.
22 Barefoot 309.

23 HSS Regs, I.A. The Need for PrivacyStandards, Fed. Reg. 59919.
24 Fed. Reg. 59919-20
25 Fed. Reg. 59920.
26 Id.
27 Id.
28 Fed. Reg. 59921.
29 Fed. Reg. 59923.
30 Fed. Reg. 59923-4.
31 1d.
32 Fed. Reg. 59924.
33 Fed. Reg. 59943.
34 Fed. Reg. 59955.
35 Fed. Reg. 59956.
36 Fed. Reg. 59957.

37 Id.
38 Fed. Reg. 59958.
39 Fed. Reg. 59959.
40 Fed. Reg. 59960.
41 Fed. Reg. 59961.
42 Fed. Reg. 59964.
43 Fed. Reg. 59966.
44 Fed. Reg. 59966.
45 Id.
46 Id.
47 Fed. Reg. 59967.
48 Julie Earp and FayCobb Payton, Information PrivacyConcerns FacingHealthcare
Organizations in the New Millennium, Working Paper, NCSU, College of
Management.

Table 1: Frequency Data for Survey
SD

SA

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Wtd
Sum

Wtd
Avg

E. XXXX should devote more time and effort to preventing unauthorized access
to patients' personal and financial information.

48

25

16

39

20

7

1

45I

2.89

A. It usually bothers me when XXXX asks patients for their personal and
financial information.

35

39

12

45

16

3

6

469

3

O. XXXX should take steps to make sure that unauthorized persons cannot
access patient information in its computers.

38

22

14

64

10

4

4

482

3.09

G. XXXX should take more steps to make sure that the patient information in
its files is accurate.

19

17

22

30

15

17

36

668

4.28

H. When patients give personal information to XXXX for some reason, XXXX
should never use the information for any reason (other than its original intent).

2

5

9

52

25

22

41

791

5.07

4

10

44

27

27

41

i 807

5.17

50

824

5.28

42

826

5.29

J. Computer databases that contain patient information should be protected
from unauthorized access - no matter how much it costs.
D. XXXX should not use patient information for any purpose unless it has been
authorized by the patient who provided the information.

3

4

8

42

23

26

B. It usually bothers me when XXXX asks patients for their personal and
financial information.

5

7

8

22

31

41
I

L. XXXX should never sell the patient information in its computer databases to
other companies.
E When XXXX asks patients for personal and financial information, I sometimes
think twice before recording it.

2

3

2

32

4

3

7

26

41

35

41

844

5.41

30

33

53

854

5.47

I

C. All the patient information in computer databases should be double-checked
for accuracy - no matter how much this costs.

5

6

7

10

11

20

97

932

5.97

I. XXXX should have better procedures to correct errors in patient information.

2

3

2

11

22

37

79

943

6.04

1

1

5

8

23

115

1011

6.48

1

1

5

9

21

117

1017

6.51

M. XXXX should devote more time and effort to verifying the accuracy of the
patient information in its databases.
N. XXXX should never share patient information with other companies unless it
has been authorized by the patients who provided the information.

Computers and Society, December 2000

4.7

