The HIPAA Privacy Rule and Adolescents: Legal Questions and Clinical Challenges
Author(s): Abigail English and Carol A. Ford
Source: Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health , Mar. - Apr., 2004, Vol. 36, No.
2 (Mar. - Apr., 2004), pp. 80-86
Published by: Guttmacher Institute
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/3181198
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms

Guttmacher Institute is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to
Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health

This content downloaded from
128.59.178.190 on Mon, 28 Apr 2025 19:40:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

COMMENT

The HIPAA Privacy Rule and Adole

Legal Questions and Clinical Chall

ByAbigail English
and CarolA. Ford

health care,9
can deterthat
them from
communicating openIn August 2002, a new federal rulefor
took
effect
protects

the privacy of individuals' healthly information
and
medical
with providers,10 and can make
them
reluctant to accept

records.1 The rule, which is based
requirements
conserviceson
such as
pelvic examinations and testing
for STDs.l1
Abigail English is
director, Centerfor
Adolescent Health &

tained in the Health Insurance Portability
and
Accountability
Confidentiality
protections
for adolescent health care

Act of 1996 (HIPAA), embodies important
for
are reflected in the protections
policies and ethical guidelines
of a wide
minors, along with a significant degree
range of medical
of deference
and health care professional
to other
organiza-

the Law, Chapel Hill,
NC. Carol A. Ford is

laws (both state and federal) and to
the
health
tions.12
They judgment
also are embodied in of
numerous
state and fed-

associate professor,

HIPAA privacy
to adolescents' health information.
between competing viewpoints the
about
therule
importance
of

Departments of Pediatrics and Internal

Medicine, Adolescent

laws that have greatasignificance
for the application of
care providers. These provisionseral
represent
compromise
parental access to minors' health information and the availOF care
THE RULE
ability of confidential adolescentPROVISIONS
health
services.

Medicine Program,
University of North

Carolina, Chapel Hill.

CONFIDENTIALITY FOR ADOLESCENTS

The HIPAA privacy rule* creates new rights for individuals to have access to their health information and medical

records (referred to as "protected health information"), to
Over the past several decades, adolescents have gained many

obtain copies and to request corrections.13 It also specifies
opportunities to receive confidential health care services,

when an individual's authorization is required for discloparticularly for concerns related to sexual activity, pregsure of protected health information; authorization is gennancy, HIV and other sexually transmitted diseases (STDs),
substance abuse and mental health.2 From both a clinical
erally not required for the use of the information and its
disclosure for the purpose of treatment, payment or health
and a public policy perspective, protection of confidentiality

care operations.14 The rule applies to health plans, health
for adolescents has been based on recognition that some

minors would not seek needed health care if they could
care providers and health care clearinghouses (which are
"covered entities"). The vast majority of health care pronot receive it confidentially, and that their forgoing all
care

fessionals who provide care to adolescents are required to
would have negative health implications for them as well
comply.

as society.3

Concerns about privacy can prevent adolescents from

Under the HIPAA privacy rule, adolescents who legally

seeking care.4 In two large nationally representative sur-

are adults (aged 18 or older) and emancipated minors can

veys, approximately a quarter of middle and high school

exercise the rights of individuals; specific provisions ad-

students reported having forgone health care they needed.5 In one of these, a third of students who did not seek

are younger than 18 and not emancipated.15 Parents (in-

care reported that one of their reasons was "not wanting

cluding guardians and persons acting in loco parentis) are

to tell their parents."6 The impact of privacy concerns when

considered to be the "personal representatives" of their un-

adolescents require specific services to address sensitive

emancipated minor children if they have the right to make

health issues is likely much higher. For example, half of sin-

health care decisions for them. As personal representatives,

dress the protected health information of adolescents who

gle, sexually active females younger than 18 years surveyed

parents generally have access to their children's protected

in family planning clinics in Wisconsin reported that they

health information. In specific circumstances, however, par-

would stop using the clinics if parental notification for pre-

ents may not be the personal representatives of their minor
children.

scription contraceptives were mandatory; another one in

10 reported that they would delay or discontinue use of
specific services, such as services for STDs.7 Furthermore,
only 1% of adolescent girls who indicated they would stop

Minors Acting as Individuals

A minor is considered "the individual" who can exercise

using family planning services reported that they would

rights under the rule in one of three circumstances. The

also stop having intercourse; the vast majority reported that

first situation-and the one that is likely to occur most often-

they would continue to have sex, but use less effective con-

is when the minor has the right to consent to health care

traceptive methods or none at all.8

Privacy concerns also influence where adolescents go
*The rule's formal title is Standards for Privacy of Individually Identifiable
Health Information.

and has consented, such as when a minor has consented
to treatment of an STD under a state minor consent law.
The second situation is when the minor may legally receive
the care without parental consent, and the minor or another
individual or a court has consented to the care, such as when

Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health

80

This content downloaded from
128.59.178.190 on Mon, 28 Apr 2025 19:40:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

a minor has requested and received court approval to have

larly important when a minor believes that disclosure of

an abortion without parental consent or notification. The

information would result in specific danger.18

third situation is when a parent has assented to an agree-

The privacy rule allows a health care provider or health

ment of confidentiality between the health care provider

plan not to treat a parent as a minor's personal represen-

and the minor, which occurs most often when an adoles-

tative, given a reasonable belief that the parent has subjected

cent is seen by a physician who knows the family. In each

or may subject the minor to domestic violence, abuse or

of these circumstances, the parent is not the personal rep-

neglect, or that treating the parent as the personal repre-

resentative of the minor and does not automatically have

sentative could endanger the minor. The provider or plan
must also decide that it is not in the minor's best interest

the right of access to health information specific to the situation, unless the minor requests that the parent act as the

to treat the parent as the personal representative.19 In ad-

personal representative and have access.

dition, the rule allows a licensed health care professional

Parents' Access to Information

a minor's protected health information if, in the profes-

to deny a parent who is a personal representative access to

A minor who is considered "the individual" may exercise

sional's judgment, access would likely cause substantial

most of the same rights as an adult under the regulation,

harm to the minor or someone else.20 Finally, it allows a

with one important exception. Provisions that are specific

provider or health plan to disclose a minor's protected

to unemancipated minors determine whether a parent who

health information in order to prevent or diminish an im-

is not the minor's personal representative under the rule

minent threat to the health and safety of a person or the

may have access to the minor's protected health informa-

public.21 These provisions apply to adults as well as minors

tion. On this issue, the HIPAA privacy rule defers to "state

but have different implications for minors, specifically with

or other applicable law."

respect to disclosure of information to parents.

If a state or other law explicitly requires information to

be disclosed to a parent, the rule allows a health care

LEGAL CONTEXT

provider to comply with that law and to disclose the in-

The final 2002 HIPAA privacy rule evolved from one issued

formation. If a state or other law explicitly permits, but does

in December 2000.* Throughout the public debate over

not require, information to be disclosed to a parent, the rule

and review of the original version and proposed modifi-

allows a provider to exercise discretion to disclose or not.

cations, a broad array of medical and health care profes-

If a state or other law prohibits disclosure of information

sional groups strongly supported the rule's maintaining

or records to a parent without the minor's consent, the rule

confidentiality protections for minors.t22 The final version

does not allow a provider to disclose without the minor's

reflects compromise and a balance among competing views.

permission. If state or other law is silent on the question

It gives minors somewhat less control over parents' access

of parents' access, a provider or health plan has discretion

to their health information than the original version did,

to determine whether to grant access to a parent who re-

and gives providers and health plans greater discretion re-

quests it. Although some comments on the proposed rule

garding parental access to minors' health information, par-

suggested that this decision should be made by the treat-

ticularly when state or other law is silent or unclear. How-

ing provider, the rule does not require this. In most situa-

ever, on the question of parents' access to information that

tions of direct clinical care, it would be desirable for the treat-

has traditionally been considered confidential when mi-

ing provider to make determinations about access to a

nors themselves consented to the services, the Department

minor's protected health information. Where this is not

of Health and Human Services (the federal agency that pro-

feasible or appropriate, such as when health plans receive

mulgated the rule) deferred to state or other law, and to

requests for records, the rule stipulates that at a minimum

"professional practice with respect to adolescent health

the determination must be made by a licensed health care

care."23 The rule thus keeps intact a body of law that has

professional exercising professional judgment.

been in place for decades, while leaving the door open for
that law to change.

Special Privacy Protections

The compromise struck in the HIPAA privacy rule on

Two important provisions of the HIPAA privacy rule allow

minors' rights leaves health care providers and health plans

minors who are treated as "individuals" to request special

with a series of important questions regarding the rela-

privacy protections. First, these minors may request that
health care providers and health plans communicate with
them in a confidential manner: by e-mail rather than by
phone, or at a place other than their home, for example.16

Also, they may request limitations on disclosure of infor-

mation for treatment, payment or health care operations
that could ordinarily occur without their authorization,17

although the extent to which providers and plans are required to honor such requests varies by the type of request

and to whom it is made. These requests may be particu-

*A proposed rule was issued in November 1999, and following extensive
comments, a final rule was issued in December 2000. Modifications, initially proposed in March 2002, were issued as a final rule in August 2002.
tThe following groups cosigned a letter urging these protections: Ambulatory Pediatric Association, American Academy of Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry, American Academy of Family Physicians, American Academy
of Pediatrics, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, American Medical Association, American Pediatric Society, American Psychiatric
Association, American Psychological Association, American Public Health
Association, Association of Maternal and Child Health Programs, Association of Medical School Pediatric Department Chairs, National Association
of Pediatric Nurse Practitioners, Society for Adolescent Medicine, and Society

for Pediatric Research (source: reference 22).

Volume 36, Number 2, March/April 2004

81

This content downloaded from
128.59.178.190 on Mon, 28 Apr 2025 19:40:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

The HIPAA Privacy Rule andAdolescents

tionship between the rule and the "state and other appli-

tion arise when health care is delivered in a school-based

cable laws" to which it refers. Many such laws are critical-

health clinic or by a school nurse, or when professionals

ly important to determining how the rule will be imple-

working in a school have extensive communications about

mented. These include state minor consent, medical records

a student's health.

and health privacy laws; the Federal Educational Rights

In any specific situation, determining whether the rele-

and Privacy Act (FERPA), Title X of the Public Health Service Act and Medicaid.

vant information and records are covered by FERPA or the

HIPAA privacy rule requires careful analysis. Most often,
however, information that is in the records of a school-based

State Minor Consent Laws

health center, where adolescents often turn with an ex-

Every state has laws that allow minors to give their own

pectation of confidentiality, is not part of a student's edu-

consent for some kinds of health care-including emergency,

cation record. If that is the case, the health center's records

general health, contraceptive, pregnancy-related, HIV or

would not be subject to FERPA; they would likely be cov-

other STD, substance abuse and mental health care. Every
state also has some laws that allow minors to consent for

ered by HIPAA.30

care if they are emancipated, mature, living apart from their

itle Xand Medicaid

parents, pregnant, parents, high school graduates or older

For more than 30 years, the federal Title X legislation has

than a certain age. Many of these laws have been in place

required that confidential services be available to adoles-

for several decades. The HIPAA privacy rule defers to them.24

cents as well as adults in Title X-funded family planning

Adolescents and the professionals who provide their

programs.31 While this protection has been the subject of

health care have long expected that when an adolescent is

legislative debate, regulatory challenge and litigation

allowed to give consent for health care, information per-

throughout its history, it remains in federal law today and

taining to it will usually be considered confidential. The

has been modified only to the extent of encouraging, not

language of the statutes themselves sometimes supports

mandating, family involvement.32 Similarly, Medicaid ben-

this understanding. Many minor consent laws contain ex-

eficiaries, including minors, are entitled to receive family

plicit provisions regarding the disclosure of information to

planning services, and confidentiality protections apply.33

parents. Some do not allow disclosure without the minor's

Courts have invalidated mandates for disclosure to parents

permission. Others leave the decision about disclosure to

when minors receive family planning services through Title

the physician's discretion. Very few mandate disclosure.25

X or Medicaid.34 The HIPAA rule defers to this legislation

Some minor consent laws are silent on the question of par-

and relevant court decisions.

ents' access to the information. In those cases, unless state
or other law addresses parents' access, the HIPAA rule gives

Constitutional Law

discretion to the provider or health plan to decide whether

Numerous decisions of the U.S. Supreme Court and other

a parent who requests access should have it; the decision

courts recognize that the constitutional right of privacy pro-

must be made by a licensed health care professional.

tects minors as well as adults. These decisions support minors' right to receive contraception without parental con-

OtherState Law

sent, even in a state that does not have a law explicitly

For adults, the HIPAA privacy rule defers to state laws that

allowing them to do so, and even if they are not Medicaid

provide stronger privacy protections than the federal rule,

beneficiaries or patients at Title X-funded clinics. In these

but if state laws provide weaker protection, the federal rule

circumstances, a minor would be considered "the individ-

controls. For minors, on the question of parental access to

ual" under the HIPAA privacy rule.

information, the rule defers to state laws unless they are

Dozens of state statutes (most of which are being en-

silent or unclear. Many states have enacted laws concerning privacy of health information and medical records, al-

forced) require parental consent or notification when a
minor seeks an abortion, usually with a "judicial bypass"

though not all address disclosure of information to parents
when minors have consented to the care.26 At least three

parental knowledge or consent. In a state requiring parental

states-California, Montana and Washington-have adopt-

consent, if the minor does not use the bypass and allows

ed health privacy laws that explicitly give minors authori-

consent to be obtained from her parents, she will not be

ty over their own information and records when they have

alternative that allows her to obtain an abortion without

considered the individual under the HIPAA rule. If she uses

the legal right to consent to care.27

the bypass option, or is in a state that requires parental notification but not consent, the minor will be considered "the

FERPA

individual."35

Any information that is governed by FERPA is explicitly ex-

empt from the HIPAA rule's definition of protected health

CLINICAL PRACTICE

Clinicians providing adolescent health care must imple-

information.28 In general, under FERPA, parents have access to the education records of their unemancipated minor

ment the changes required by the HIPAA privacy rule in

children, including any health information contained in

all settings.36 They also must be aware of the aspects of the

those records.29 Thus, important questions of interpreta-

rule that apply to unemancipated minors and must un-

Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health

82

This content downloaded from
128.59.178.190 on Mon, 28 Apr 2025 19:40:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

derstand how to provide health care within this context.37

HIPAA PRIVACYRULE RESOURCES

This requires the following:

* Health care professionals must be knowledgeable about

General ii.formation

state minor consent laws, including any provisions regarding

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), CDC/ATSDR privacy

disclosure of information to parents.

* Health care professionals must be knowledgeable about
any state laws regarding privacy of health information and

rule homepage, <http://www.cdc.gov/privacyrule>
Health Privacy Project, Institute for Health Care Research and Policy,
Georgetown University, <http://www.healthprivacy.org>

medical records, including provisions pertaining to dis-

National Institutes of Health, HIPAA privacy rule: information for

closure of information to parents, particularly when minors

researchers, <http://privacyruleandresearch.nih.gov>

may legally give their own consent for care.

Office for Civil Rights, US. Department of Health and Human Services

*When state and other laws are silent or unclear, health
care professionals must be prepared to exercise professional

(DHHS), HIPAA: medical privacy-national standards to protect the privacy of personal health information, <http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/hipaa>

judgment and grant or deny parents' requests for infor-

Summaries and reports

mation about care for which minors may legally consent.

CDC, HIPAA privacy rule and public health: guidance from CDC and

* Health care professionals must be aware that the HIPAA

the US. Department of Health and Human Services, Morbidityand
Mortality WeeklyReport, 2003, 52(S-1):1-12

prvacy rule grants legal significance to agreements with parents that favor their adolescents' receiving at least some health

care on a confidential basis. The rule provides that in such
situations, the minor generally assumes the rights to control access to information and records of the care (subject

to state and other laws' provisions about parents' access).
* Health care professionals must clarify the location of health

information obtained during delivery of care in school-based

English A and Kenney KE, State Minor Consent Laws:A Summary, second ed., Chapel Hill, NC: Center for Adolescent Health & the Law, 2003
Health Privacy Project, Institute for Health Care Research and Policy,
Georgetown University, SummaryofHIPAA PrivacyRule, 2002, <http://

www.healthprivacy.org/usr_doc/RegSummary2002.pdf>
National Institutes of Health, Protecting personal health information in research: understanding the HIPAA privacy rule, <http://

privacyruleandresearch.nih.gov/pr_02.asp>

health centers. If the information becomes part of a student's

education record, it is likely covered by FERPA, which gives

parents access to the record.
* Health care professionals must understand the requirements of Tide X and Medicaid, which protect adolescents'
access to confidential family planning services.

Office for Civil Rights, DHHS, Summary of the HIPAA privacy rule,

<http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacysummary.pdf>
Weiss C and Dalven J, Protecting Minors'Health Information Under the

FederalMedicalPrivacyRegulations, American Civil Uberties Union
Reproductive Freedom Project, 2003, <http://wwwaclu.org/Files/

OpenFile.cfm?id=12117>

* Health care professionals must understand the constitutional privacy rights that protect minors' access to con-

a minor to request that providers and health plans restrict

traception and abortion. Clinicians providing abortions

disclosure of their protected health information or that they

should make sure that minors understand that obtaining

communicate with the minor in a confidential manner,38

parental consent or seeking ajudicial bypass will affect their

the effective implementation of these provisions requires

ability to control abortion-related health information.

The privacy rule does not address many practical issues

the willing and active cooperation of both health care
providers and third-party payers.

that affect clinicians' ability to provide confidential care for

Finally, clinicians continue to face the challenge of con-

adolescents. Clinicians still must determine minors' capacity

veying the protections and limitations of confidentiality to

to give informed consent. Clinicians still need to screen for

adolescent patients and their parents. They also still face

situations th;at will limit minors' ability to receive confidential

the challenge of encouraging communication between ado-

care, such as physical or sexual abuse, and risk of homi-

lescent patients and their parents in a way that is respect-

cide or suicide. Clinicians still face challenges concerning

ful of adolescents' need for privacy and the support that

how to maintain their records when the parent has rights
to obtain some of their adolescent's health information.

parents can provide.

Such challenges may arise less frequently in specialized set-

HIPAA IN THE REAL WORLD

tings, such as STD or family planning clinics, than in clin-

Each year, millions of adolescents seek family planning ser-

ical settings where comprehensive health services are pro-

vices and STD screening. Many are minors, are competent

vided, such as private physicians' offices. Electronic medical

to give informed consent for health care and deny being at

records, over which physicians may have little control, add

risk of physical or sexual abuse. Two critical issues affect

complexity to this issue.

how the HIPAA privacy rule applies in these situations: the

Third-party reimbursement also creates challenges. Many

adolescents are covered by public or private insurance, but

state in which the minor is located and the type of site where

the care is provided.

some are unwilling or unable to use their coverage for con-

traceptive services, STD diagnosis and treatment, or other

Private Practice Settings

sensitive issues, because they worry that their parents will

Often an adolescent is seen at a private physician's office

find out through the billing and insurance claims process.

for routine health care (which should include testing for

Although the HIPAA privacy rule provides a legal basis for

chlamydial infection if she is sexually experienced), con-

Volume 36, Number 2, March/April 2004

83

This content downloaded from
128.59.178.190 on Mon, 28 Apr 2025 19:40:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

The HIPAA Privacy Rule andAdolescents

cerns about STD symptoms or family planning services. If

pay special attention to ensuring that information about

she is a minor, the STD screening is a service that she would

family planning and STD screening is not unintentionally

be able to give her own consent for in every state, although

disclosed along with other medical records. This is also true

the age limit varies. Title X, state law or constitutional prin-

if the student's parent has authorized disclosure of health

ciples also would permit her to give her own consent for

information or medical records to others, such as a new

family planning services. Moreover, her parent may have

school or a camp. To the extent that confidentiality con-

agreed to her receiving confidential care from the physi-

cerns arise with respect to billing and third-party reim-

cian. In these situations, under the HIPAA privacy rule, the

bursement linked to school-based clinics, the same gener-

adolescent is considered an "individual." Should her par-

al considerations apply as in a private physician's office.

ents at some point want access to information and records

Finally, school-based health centers may have to address

of her care, they would be entitled to access to information

suggestions from school personnel that their records are

about most of the general care she has received-routine

covered not by HIPAA, but by FERPA. This will rarely be

.it is notyet care for minor acute problems, immunizations, sports phys-

true, as long as school-based health centers or their spon-

icals-but whether they could access information about the

soring agencies meet the privacy rule's definition of a "cov-

STD screening and family planning would depend on state

ered entity" and center staff are careful to enter protected

andfederallaws or other law. If the laws clearly prohibit disclosure without

information only into the health center's record and not

the minor's permission or give physicians discretion, they

into a student's general education records, where it would

andpoliies will control. If the laws are silent or unclear, the rule gives physi-

be accessible to parents under FERPA Nevertheless, schools

cians and other covered entities discretion on whether par-

evolve as ents should have access to the medical records.
The most challenging issues in a private physician's of-

implementation fice arise with respect to billing and third-party reimbursement. If the office has routinely sent bills home for

of the HIPAA the minor's care, some diligence will be required to ensure
that information on the bill does not inadvertently disclose

privacyrule confidential information to the parents. Moreover, if the

and school-based health centers need procedures for determining which records are governed by the requirements

of which law and what those requirements mean for how
the information can be used with the school. Information
about family planning or STD screening in a school-based
health center will almost never be accessible to the school,
and will be accessible to parents only under specific provisions of state law.

minor has health insurance coverage and wishes to use it

proceeds. to pay for the care, additional risks exist that disclosure will

Specialized Clinic Settings

take place through the insurance claims process, when ex-

Every day, adolescents seek family planning or STD services

planations of benefits are sent to the policyholder, usually

in clinics specifically designed to provide such care. The ap-

a parent. The rule may minimize these risks if minors use

plication of the HIPAA privacy rule in these settings may

the option of requesting restrictions on disclosure or con-

differ markedly from its application in private physician of-

fidential communications. Ultimately, however, effective

fices or school-based health centers. At Title X-funded fam-

implementation of confidential care for minors in a private

ily planning clinics, the confidentiality protections of Title

physician's office depends on cooperation of the minor,

X apply; thus, if a minor receives contraceptive or STD care,

the physician, and any health plan or insurer that is involved.

the services are confidential and the minor's permission is
required for information to be disclosed to her parent. The

School-Based Health Centers

issues may be slightly more complex in family planning or

All school-based health centers require some form of con-

STD clinics not receiving Title X funds. If the minor is a Med-

sent from parents before a student who is a minor receives

icaid recipient, he or she is also entitled to receive confidential

care. Often the parent need only sign a general consent form

family planning services if the services are billed to Medic-

at the beginning of the school year. Many of these forms

aid. (The same is true in other Medicaid provider sites, in-

specify the services offered at the center, and many speci-

cluding private physician offices and school-based health

fy that services are confidential. However, in general, school-

centers.) However, once again, the variation in practice

based health centers work hard to involve parents when-

among Medicaid managed care plans and state Medicaid

ever that is possible and appropriate.

agencies with respect to the handling of confidential ser-

Many school-based health centers offer family planning

services and STD screening, and often students want and
expect that care to be confidential. In every state, minors

vices on claim forms and benefit statements poses challenges.

OPEN QUESTIONS

can legally consent for STD screening; the same is usually

Although the specific applications of the HIPAA privacy

true for family planning. As a result, information about STD

rule vary by state and within different clinical settings, there

screening and family planning is in a different category from

are common themes and questions, which will be resolved

information about general health care-which the minor

over time. Questions of overriding importance include the

may not have the legal right to consent for under state law.

following:
* In what circumstances should health care professionals

Thus, if information about the minor's health and services
received at the center is requested either by a parent or by
other school personnel, the school-based health center must

exercise any legal discretion they may have to disclose information about care for which an adolescent gave consent

Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health

84

This content downloaded from
128.59.178.190 on Mon, 28 Apr 2025 19:40:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

and that the adolescent sought with a desire for confiden-

Law & Policy, 2001, 1(1):63-108.

tiality protection? This question can be answered only in

3. Ford CA and English A, Limiting confidentiality of adolescent health
services: what are the risks? editorial, Journal of the American Medical

part by reference to law, and will be greatly informed by

Association, 2002, 288(6):752-753.

sound standards of ethics and clinical practice.

4. KleinJ, McNulty L and Flatau C, Teenager's self-reported use of ser-

* When state and other laws are silent on the question of

vices and perceived access to confidential care, Archives of Pediatrics &
Adolescent Medicine, 1998, 152(7):676-682; KleinJ et al., Access to medical care for adolescents: results from the 1997 Commonwealth Fund

parents' access to information once a minor has consented to care (or the parent has agreed to allow the minor to

Survey of the Health of Adolescent Girls,Journal of Adolescent Health,

receive confidential care), how and by whom will deter-

1999, 25(2):120-130; Ford C, Bearman P and MoodyJ, Foregone health
care among adolescents,Journal of the American Medical Association,

minations be made about parents' requests for access to
information or records? This question will have to be an-

1999, 282(23):2227-2234; Reddy DM, Fleming R and Swain C, Effect

swered largely in the context of protocol development and

of mandatory parental notification on adolescent girls' use of sexual
health care services,Journal of the American Medical Association, 2002,

systems review within provider sites and health plans.
* To what extent will minors be able to receive insurance

288(6):710-714; Sugerman S et al., Family planning clinic clients: their
usual health care providers, insurance status, and implications for man-

aged care,Journal of Adolescent Health, 2000, 27(1):25-33; Marks A et

coverage for services that would generally entitle them to

al., Assessment of health needs and willingness to utilize health care

confidentiality under state or other law? Answers to this

resources of adolescents in a suburban population,Journal of Pediatrics,

question will depend on extensive discussion and planning

1983, 102(3):456-460; and Cheng T et al., Confidentiality in health
care: a survey of knowledge, perceptions, and attitudes among high
school students, Journal of the American Medical Association, 1993,

among clinicians, health plans, health insurance companies, Medicaid agencies and others.

269(11):1404-1407.

To the degree that willing providers and health plans ad-

5. Ford C, Bearman P and MoodyJ, 1999, op. cit. (see reference 4); and
KleinJ et al., 1999, op. cit. (see reference 4).

dress these questions in good faith with the desire to provide
high-quality ethical care, to be flexible about their procedures

6. KleinJ et al., 1999, op. cit. (see reference 4).

and to honor adolescents' need for confidentiality, the HIPAA

7. Reddy DM, Fleming R and Swain C, 2002, op. cit. (see reference 4).

privacy rule provides an excellent basis for them to do so.

8. Ibid.

9. Lane M et al., Features of sexually transmitted disease services

WHAT NEXT?

important to African-American adolescents, Archives of Pediatrics &
Overall, the HIPAA privacy rule requires some sweepingAdolescent Medicine, 1999, 153(8):829-833; Sugerman S et al., 2000,

changes by entire health care systems in the handling of op. cit. (see reference 4); and Cheng T et al., 1993, op. cit. (see reference 4).

individuals health information. The rule had the potential

to make sweeping changes in adolescents' ability to access 10. Ford C et al., Influence of physician confidentiality assurances on

services on a confidential basis, but in the end left the sta-adolescents' willingness to disclose information and seek future health
care,Journal of the American Medical Association, 1997,278(12):1029-

tus quo essentially intact. It acknowledges the validity and1034.

reaffirms th e importance of the broad range of laws put in11. ThrallJ et al., Confidentiality and adolescents' use of providers for

place over several decades that are supported by a strong health information and for pelvic exams, Archives of Pediatrics & Adobody of research and reflected in the ethical codes and or-lescent Medicine, 2000, 154(9):885-892; Ford CA, Best DB and Miller
WC, Confidentiality and adolescents' willingness to consent to STD

ganizational policies of many health care professionals.
testing, Archives of Pediatrics &Adolescent Medicine, 2001, 155(9):1072However, the rule also leaves both the states and Con-1073; and Meehan TM, Hansen H and Klein WC, The impact of parental
gress free to alter existing laws. Thus at the state or feder- consent on the HIV testing of minors, AmericanJournal of Public Health,
1997, 97(8):1338-1341.

al level, laws that have enabled adolescents to receive con-

fidential care could be amended or repealed, and new laws12. Morreale MC and Dowling EC, Policy Compendium on Confidential

Health Servicesfor Adolescents, second ed., Chapel Hill, NC: Center for

addressing the privacy of adolescents' health informationAdolescent Health & the Law, 2004 (forthcoming).

could be enacted. While this has always been true, the

13. Health Privacy Project, Institute for Health Care Research and Policy,

heightened attention to questions of confidentiality in ado-Georgetown University, Summary of HIPAA Privacy Rule, 2002, <http://

lescent care could lead to more activity in state legislatureswww.healthprivacy.org/usr_doc/RegSummary2002.pdf>, accessedJuly
29,2003.

orin Congress.

14. Ibid.

Some attempts have already been made to repeal minor

consent laws that have been on the books for 30 years3915.45 CFR ? 164.502(g)(3); and Weiss C and DalvenJ, Protecting Minors'
and to require parental notification for adolescents receiv-Health Information Under the Federal Medical Privacy Regulations, American Civil Liberties Union Reproductive Freedom Project, 2003,

ing STD care,40 which has long been considered a confi-<http://www.aclu.org/Files/OpenFile.cfm?id=12117>, accessedJuly

dential service for minors in every state. So far, most such 29, 2003.

efforts have not succeeded, but it is not yet clear how state 16.45 CFR ? 164.522(b).

and federal laws and policies will evolve as implementa-17.45 CFR ? 164.522(a).
tion of the HIPAA privacy rule proceeds.
Rtf-trtNCES

18. Weiss C and DalvenJ, 2003, op. cit. (see reference 15).

19.45 CFR ? 164.502(g)(5).

1. Federal Register, 2000, 65(250):82462-82829; and Federal Register, 20. 45 CFR ? 164.524(a)(3)(iii); and Weiss C and DalvenJ, 2003, op.
2002, 67( 157):53182-53273.
cit. (see reference 15).
2. English A and Morreale M, A legal and policy framework for ado- 21.45 CFR 512(j)(1)(i); and Weiss C and DalvenJ, 2003, op. cit. (see

lescent health care: past, present, and future, HoustonJournal of Health reference 15).

Volume 36, Number 2, March/April 2004

85

This content downloaded from
128.59.178.190 on Mon, 28 Apr 2025 19:40:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

The HIPAA Privacy Rule and Adolescents

22. Ford CA and English A, 2002, op. cit. (see reference 3); and American Academy of Pediatrics et al., Letter to U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services (DHHS), Office for Civil Rights, re: standards for
privacy of individually identifiable health information, proposed rule,

Elk Grove, IL, and Washington, DC, Apr. 26, 2002.

23. Federal Register, 2002, 67(157):53200.
24. English A and Kenney KE, State Minor Consent Laws: A Summary,

second ed., Chapel Hill, NC: Center for Adolescent Health & the Law,
2003; and Boonstra H and Nash E, Minors and the right to consent to
health care, Guttmacher Report on Public Policy, 2000, 3(4):4-8.

25. English A and Kenney KE, 2003, op. cit. (see reference 24).
26. Health Privacy Project, 2002, op. cit. (see reference 13).
27. English A and Kenney KE, 2003, op. cit. (see reference 24).
28. 45 CFR ? 160.103; Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act, 20

USC ?? 1232g; and 34 CFR, part 98.

32.42 USC ? 300(a).

33.42 USC ?? 1396a(a)(7), 1396d(a)(4)(C); and 42 CFR ? 441.20.
34. Planned Parenthood Federation of New York v. Heckler, 712 F. 2d 650

(DC Cir. 1983); National Family Planning and Reproductive Health
Association v. Department of Health and Human Services, F. 2d 650 (DC

Cir. 1983); and T.H. v.Jones, 425 F. Supp. 873 (D. Utah), 425 U.S. 986
(1976), affd in part.

35. Weiss C and DalvenJ, 2003, op. cit. (see reference 15).
36. Office for Civil Rights, DHHS, Summary of the HIPAA privacy rule,

2003, <http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacysummary.pdf>, accessed Aug.
11, 2003.
37. Weiss C and DalvenJ, 2003, op cit. (see reference 15).
38. Ibid.

39. Minn. H.F. No. 352, Feb. 10, 2003.
40. Va. H.R 1499, Dec. 10, 2002.

29. Cheung O, Clements B and Pechman E, Protecting the Privacy of
Student Records: Guidelines for Education Agencies, National Center for

Education Statistics, 1997, <http://nces.ed.gov/pubs97/97527.pdf>,

accessed May 12, 2003.
30. MooreJ and Wall A, Applicability of HIPAA to Health Information in

Schools, University of North Carolina Institute of Government, 2003,

<www.medicalprivacy.unc.edu/pdfs/schools.pdf>, accessed Mar. 5,

Acknowledgments
Preparation of this comment was supported by The Annie E. Casey

Foundation, Centerfor Health Care Strategies, The W.K. Kellogg
Foundation, The David and Lucile Packard Foundation, and The

George Gund Foundation. The views expressed are those of the
authors.

2004.

31.42 USC ? 300 et seq. 42 CFR Part 59.

Author contact: english@cahl. org

Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health

86

This content downloaded from
128.59.178.190 on Mon, 28 Apr 2025 19:40:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

