Boston University School of Law

Scholarly Commons at Boston University School of Law
Faculty Scholarship
2003

HIPAA Regulations: A New Era of Medical-Record Privacy?
George J. Annas

Follow this and additional works at: https://scholarship.law.bu.edu/faculty_scholarship
Part of the Health Law and Policy Commons

The new england journal of medicine

legal issues in medicine

HIPAA Regulations — A New Era of Medical-Record Privacy?
George J. Annas, J.D., M.P.H.
Although the regulations under the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996
(HIPAA) regarding the privacy of medical records
are new,1 the concept of using federal law to protect
the privacy of medical records is not. The substance
of the new regulations can be traced back to work
done in the 1970s, especially the report of the Privacy Protection Study Commission, which helped to
articulate the case for national privacy standards for
a variety of records kept on citizens.2 The Clinton
Health Security Act contains a separate section entitled “Privacy of Information” that sets forth the
framework for the national standards created by the
HIPAA regulations.3 Provisions for the privacy of
medical records became part of HIPAA,4 which authorized the secretary of Health and Human Services to promulgate regulations to protect the privacy
of health information in which the patient is identifiable in the event that Congress did not enact legislation on this subject (which it did not).
In the context of the Clinton health plan, rules for
the privacy of medical records were part of a much
broader package whose main aim was to provide access to health insurance for all Americans. Now regulations for medical-record privacy have arrived
alone. I believe the new regulations are excessively
and unnecessarily complex and often more attuned
to making sure that businesses and government
agencies get access to medical records than to the
protection of patients’ privacy. The debate over the
content and effect of the HIPAA regulations has
been fierce over the past four years and is likely to
intensify in the post–September 11 era of surveillance, which has brought even more proposals to
authorize virtually unlimited access to medical records by national security, law-enforcement, and
public health agencies.5-7
A new cadre of HIPAA consultants has grown up
in the past few years, and hospitals, health plans,
and many physician-run practices have found their
help essential in understanding how to comply with
the new regulations. This need arises because although the core principles behind the regulations

1486

n engl j med 348;15

are readily understandable, the regulations themselves are long, complex, and overlaid with commentary. Moreover, we have been through three different versions of the “final” regulations in the past
two years, and there will undoubtedly be more
changes as they are implemented.
My purpose in this article is not to provide an indepth analysis or critique (the regulations are filled
with compromises, and few people are entirely happy with them), but rather to provide a basic summary aimed primarily at the practicing physician.
Whatever one’s view of the HIPAA regulations,
they will form the starting point for future national regulation of medical privacy. In this sense,
they are akin to movie contracts, about which one
Hollywood executive is reported to have said, “We
have to have a contract so we have a basis for renegotiation.”

principles of privacy
It has been foundational, at least since Hippocrates,
that patients have a right to have personal medical
information kept private. Physicians have an obligation to keep medical information secret. The chief
public-policy rationale is that patients are unlikely to
disclose intimate details that are necessary for their
proper medical care to their physicians unless they
trust their physicians to keep that information secret. Basic privacy doctrine in the context of medical
care holds that no one should have access to private
health care information without the patient’s authorization and that the patient should have access
to records containing his or her own information,
be able to obtain a copy of the records, and have the
opportunity to correct mistakes in them.8
The HIPAA regulations can be seen as an overly
complicated way of applying these basic privacy
rules in an era of electronic communication, large
health plans, and fierce marketing campaigns.
Compliance is required by April 14, 2003, and the
regulations apply to both electronic and paper records. A physician is covered by the regulations (be-

www.nejm.org

april 10, 2003

The New England Journal of Medicine
Downloaded from nejm.org at BOSTON UNIVERSITY on November 29, 2021. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.
Copyright © 2003 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.

legal issues in medicine

comes a “covered entity,” in the language of the regulations) if he or she conducts any medical business,
including billing, electronically, even if the physician contracts with another entity or business associate to do billing. This means that most practicing
physicians will be covered, since most physicians accept private health insurance, are members of one
or more health plans, receive payment from Medicare or Medicaid, or otherwise do business electronically.
All of the HIPAA rules include an implicit requirement that the amount of individually identifiable health information released or requested for
any specific purpose — except for disclosures authorized by the patient, disclosures to another
health care provider involved in treatment, or disclosures required by law — be the “minimum necessary” to accomplish the purpose. This means that
outside the context of treatment, a patient’s entire
medical record can seldom be lawfully disclosed
without the patient’s written authorization.
The HIPAA regulations set a federal minimum,
or floor, not a ceiling, on the protection of privacy.
Thus, when other federal laws (such as laws protecting drug and alcohol treatment records) or state
laws (such as laws that provide special protections
for mental health or genetic records) provide more
protection for patients’ privacy than the new regulations, the more protective federal and state laws
will continue to govern. In addition, state law continues to govern parent–child relationships, the
rights of children, and the definitions of emancipated and mature minors. Federal regulations cannot change a state’s family law or its informedconsent laws, even if the Department of Health and
Human Services wanted to do so. Of course, the
continued importance of state law means that the
regulations ultimately fail to produce a real national
standard of medical privacy — because the application of the regulations can and will vary from state
to state.

the privacy notice
Few Americans have any idea what is done with their
medical records, and probably fewer still believe
they can have any control at all over who uses them.
There are certainly computer experts who share the
view that personal control of private information is
an illusion in the computer age and that privacy is
already dead. The HIPAA regulations reject this view
and instead aim to inform and educate patients

n engl j med 348;15

about their privacy rights. That is why all patients
must be provided with a privacy notice. The regulations require that each patient be provided with a
written “notice of privacy practices” on the day of
the first delivery of health services after the regulations become effective and that the notice itself be
prominently posted at the service site.
The privacy notice must tell the patient who will
be able to see and use the patient’s medical records,
what uses will require the patient’s specific authorization, and that patients have the right to inspect,
copy, and amend their medical records and to obtain
an accounting of disclosures. The notice must also
contain the name, title, and telephone number of a
person or office to contact, usually designated as a
privacy officer (this person could be the physician’s
office manager, for example), for further information. A good-faith effort must also be made to obtain
the patient’s written acknowledgment of receipt of
the notice. Most notably, and contrary to an earlier
proposal that the patient’s consent be required for
all uses of the medical record, patients are simply informed in this notice that their medical records can
be disclosed for uses related to treatment, payment,
or “health care operations” without any additional
notification or authorization. At least one example
of each of these uses must also be provided in the
notice.
Treatment-related uses of the medical record
have always been a reasonable expectation on the
part of both physicians and patients, although people have been genuinely surprised to learn how
many members of a hospital staff have routine access to their medical records.8,9 Use of medical records for payment-related purposes has historically
required patients’ authorization, but this usually involved the simple signing of a form in the waiting
room, and refusal to sign meant that a patient had to
pay out of pocket, so there has never been any real
choice in this matter. “Health care operations,” as
defined in the regulations, is a much broader category and includes such uses as quality assessment
(other than research), performance evaluation, the
conduct of training programs, the rating of premiums, auditing, business planning, and management. This is a compromise. Privacy advocates generally favor the earlier version of the rule that
required consent for all uses of the medical record,
including treatment.10 Under the new rule, providers can still obtain consent, but why would a provider do so if a notice alone is sufficient? On the
other hand, since even the earlier rule permitted

www.nejm.org

april 10, 2003

The New England Journal of Medicine
Downloaded from nejm.org at BOSTON UNIVERSITY on November 29, 2021. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.
Copyright © 2003 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.

1487

The new england journal of medicine

physicians to require that the patient consent to the
use of the medical record for these purposes as a
condition of treatment, voluntary consent was never really required.

authorization to disclose
health information
Under the terms of HIPAA, a valid authorization to
release health information must contain at least the
following: “a description of the information to be
used or disclosed that identifies the information in
a specific and meaningful fashion”; “the name [of
the person or entity] authorized to make the use or
disclosure”; “the name [of the person or entity] to
whom the disclosure may be made”; “a description
of each purpose of the requested use or disclosure”;
“an expiration date or expiration event” (“none” or
“end of the research study” is sufficient for researchrelated use, research data bases, or research repositories); and “the signature of the individual and
date.”1
The authorization form must be in plain language; a copy must be provided to the patient; and
the form must include a notice of the patient’s right
to revoke the authorization, the effect on the patient’s benefits of not signing, and the potential that
the information will be disclosed to unauthorized
persons by the receiver. Thus, authorization to release medical-record forms can no longer contain
blanks for the persons or entities who are to be provided with information about the patient, for the information to be provided, or for the expiration date;
such incomplete authorizations are “defective” and
invalid under the new regulations.

patients’ rights
to medical records
Under the regulations, patients have the right to inspect and obtain a copy of their entire medical record, with the exception of notes from psychotherapy
(notes of a mental health professional that document or analyze “the contents of conversation during a private counseling session . . . and are separated from the rest of the individual’s medical
record”) and “information compiled in reasonable
anticipation of, or for use in, a civil, criminal, or administrative action or proceeding.”1
There are three very narrow grounds on which
physicians can refuse to make the entire medical
record available to the patient. The patient has the

1488

n engl j med 348;15

right to have a refusal reviewed by another licensed
health care professional (other than anyone who
participated in the decision to deny access) designated by the refusing entity, and the entity must provide
access to the medical record if the reviewer determines that it should do so. Access may be refused if
“a licensed health care professional has determined,
in the exercise of professional judgment, that the access requested is reasonably likely to endanger the
life or physical safety of the individual or another
person”; if “the protected health information makes
reference to another person [and] the access requested is reasonably likely to cause substantial
harm to such person”; or if “the request for access
is made by the individual’s personal representative
[and access by that person] is reasonably likely to
cause substantial harm to the individual or another
person.”1
A reasonable, cost-based fee can be charged for
copying, including the labor costs of copying, and
postage, if applicable. Persons may also request
amendments to their medical records. Physicians
can require requests for amendments to be in writing and to state the reason for the requested amendment. Amendment can be denied if the person or
entity to whom the request is made did not create
the information or if the information is deemed to
be accurate and complete. When an amendment is
made, at the minimum, the amendment must be
appended or linked to the record it is amending,
and reasonable efforts must be made to inform others who have been provided with the original information about the amendment. If amendment
is denied, the person has the right to have a statement of disagreement (to which the entity may respond as well) appended to the disputed medical
record.1
A person also has the right to an accounting of
disclosures of protected health information made
over the previous six years. There are, however, numerous exceptions to this accounting requirement,
including disclosures for use in treatment, payment,
and health care operations, disclosures authorized
by the person or required by law, disclosures for use
in a facility directory or for national security or intelligence purposes, or disclosures that occurred before the compliance date for the new regulations.1
The accounting must include the date of disclosure,
the name and address of the person or entity who
received the information, and a brief description of
the information disclosed and the purpose for
which it was disclosed.

www.nejm.org

april 10, 2003

The New England Journal of Medicine
Downloaded from nejm.org at BOSTON UNIVERSITY on November 29, 2021. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.
Copyright © 2003 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.

legal issues in medicine

children, emergencies,
and resident training
Three examples help to illustrate how the HIPAA
rules apply and how they relate to other laws. The
first deals with minors. As noted above, state law defines the legal rights of children and their parents,
and state law continues to govern parental rights to
access to a child’s medical record. Under the regulations, parents have a right to have access to the
medical records of their minor children as long as
parental access is consistent with state law. Parents
are the personal representatives of their children
under the regulations unless it is the minor who
lawfully consents to treatment, the minor obtains
care at the direction of a court or a person appointed by the court, or the parent has agreed in advance
with the health care provider that the relationship
between the child and the health care provider will
be confidential. The final grounds for refusal of access to medical records, regarding a request by a
personal representative, apply to children as well:
a physician can deny parents access to their child’s
medical records if the physician reasonably believes
that access is likely to cause “substantial harm,”
such as physical violence by the parent against the
child.
Rules and procedures for emergency treatment
are not affected by the privacy regulations, and generally the regulations mirror common sense in this
context. Emergency care providers, for example, are
not required to provide patients with a privacy notice
at the time of rendering emergency care (the rule
in a medical emergency, “treat first and ask legal
questions later,” still applies).8 Nonetheless, after
the emergency has ended, the regulations require
that patients be provided with a privacy notice, although in this instance, the regulations do not require documentation of a good-faith effort to obtain
the patient’s written acknowledgment of receipt
of the notice.
The question of whether medical students and
house officers can have access to entire medical records is addressed by the definition of health care operations (activities that do not require specific authorization by the patient for access to records) and
the application of the requirement that the amount
of information disclosed be the “minimum necessary.” The regulations specifically include “conducting training programs in which students, trainees,
or practitioners in areas of health care learn under
supervision to practice or improve their skills as

n engl j med 348;15

health care providers” as part of the definition of
health care operations.1 The “minimum necessary”
rule, as noted above, itself has exceptions, and does
not apply to anyone involved in the treatment of the
patient. Moreover, the Office for Civil Rights of the
Department of Health and Human Services, the office charged with interpreting and enforcing the
regulations, has suggested that hospitals “can shape
their policies and procedures for minimum necessary uses and disclosures to permit medical trainees
access to patients’ medical information, including
entire medical records.”11

medical research
The new regulations have greatly simplified what
were highly contested provisions.12,13 Nonetheless,
critics continue to believe that even the simplified
research regulations will discourage entities from
making medical records available for research and
will diminish “the pace and volume of research.”14
I think this assessment is overly alarmist. On the
other hand, it is a bit strange to see the federal government focusing so much attention on protecting
the medical records and privacy of human subjects
when it is the autonomy, health, and safety of human subjects that need and deserve greater protection in the research setting.15
Although they are similar to the “common rule”
that governs research using human subjects,16 the
HIPAA regulations apply to all medical research regardless of its source of funding. To oversimplify a
bit, medical records can be used for research without the authorization of the subject if the records are
“de-identified” (so that the records cannot be easily
linked to a specific person), if they are part of a “limited data set” (in which data are stripped of most,
but not all, identifiers, and the recipient or research
entity signs an agreement consenting to adhere to
specific limitations on use and not to identify or contact the subjects), or if the institutional review board
(or a new privacy board) permits a “waiver” of consent under specific rules. Research-specific regulations have also been added to the latest version of
the HIPAA regulations. For example, the right of a
patient to gain access to medical records can be temporarily suspended as long as medical research that
includes treatment is in progress, at least if this condition was agreed to by the patient at the time he or
she consented to be a research subject and if he or
she was informed that the right to access would be
reinstated on completion of the research trial. Neg-

www.nejm.org

april 10, 2003

The New England Journal of Medicine
Downloaded from nejm.org at BOSTON UNIVERSITY on November 29, 2021. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.
Copyright © 2003 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.

1489

legal issues in medicine

ative reactions to the HIPAA regulations regarding
the use of medical records in research are at least
partly the result of the fact that there is currently no
national standard for providing researchers access
to medical records. Practice varies widely among institutions and among institutional review boards.
Unfortunately, to the extent that local institutional
review boards retain the discretionary authority to
grant waivers of consent, a national standard for the
use of medical records in research may not develop.

enforcement
Enforcement of the regulations is in the hands of the
Office of Civil Rights. The secretary of Health and
Human Services has the authority to impose a civil
money penalty of not more than $100 for each violation, not to exceed $25,000 annually for violations
of the same requirement.17 The possibility of criminal penalties has been used to frighten physicians,
although it seems highly unlikely that any physician
would ever act in such a way as to be subject to them.
Specifically, HIPPA permits persons who knowingly “obtain” or “disclose” individually identifiable health information to be fined not more than
$50,000 and imprisoned for not more than 1 year
(the limits are $100,000 and 5 years if the crime is
committed under false pretenses, and $250,000 and
10 years “if the offense is committed with intent to
sell, transfer, or use individually identifiable health
information for commercial advantage, personal
gain, or malicious harm”).18

conclusions
The implementation of the new HIPAA privacy regulations is likely to be costly, inconsistent, and frustrating to both physicians and patients. Medical privacy is critical to most Americans, national privacy
standards would be welcome, and the promise of

1490

n engl j med 348;15

privacy remains essential for much medical treatment. Nonetheless, the new privacy rules are primarily procedural in nature, are incapable of setting
a national privacy standard, and are being imposed
by fear rather than agreement on principles. Medical privacy deserves protection but should be seen
as part of health care and not as an end in itself.
From the Health Law Department, Boston University School of
Public Health, Boston.
1. Office of Civil Rights, Department of Health and Human Serv-

ices. Standards for privacy of individually identifiable health information: final rules. Fed Regist 2002;67(157):53182-272.
2. Privacy Protection Study Commission. Personal privacy in an
information society. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office,
1977.
3. Health Security Act, §5120 et seq.
4. Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996,
Pub. L. No. 104-191, 110 Stat. 1936 (1996).
5. Jacobson PD. National health information privacy regulations
under HIPAA: medical records and HIPAA: is it too late to protect
privacy? Minn Law Rev 2002;86:1497-514.
6. Gordon SM. Privacy standards for health information: the misnomer of administrative simplification. Del Law Rev 2002;5:23-55.
7. Zoeller B. Health and Human Services privacy proposal: a failed
attempt at health information privacy protection. Brandeis Law J
2002;40:1065-83.
8. Annas GJ. The rights of patients. 2nd ed. Carbondale: Southern
Illinois University Press, 1989.
9. Siegler M. Confidentiality in medicine — a decrepit concept.
N Engl J Med 1982;307:1518-21.
10. Ladine B. Medical privacy rules are relaxed. Boston Globe.
August 10, 2002:A1.
11. Standards for privacy of individually identifiable health information. Washington, D.C.: Office for Civil Rights, Department of Health
and Human Services, December 3, 2002:25. (Also available at http://
www.hhs.gov/ocr/hipaa/.)
12. Annas GJ. Medical privacy and medical research — judging the
new federal regulations. N Engl J Med 2002;346:216-20.
13. Kulynych J, Korn D. The effect of the new federal medical-privacy rule on research. N Engl J Med 2002;346:201-4.
14. Idem. The new federal medical-privacy rule. N Engl J Med 2002;
347:1133-4.
15. Federman DD, Hanna KE, Rodriguez LL, eds. Responsible
research: a systems approach to protecting research participants.
Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press, 2003.
16. Federal policy for protection of human subjects, 45 C.F.R. §46
(June 18, 1991). Fed Regist 1991;56:28003.
17. 42 U.S.C. §1320 D-1.
18. 42 U.S.C. §1320 D-6.
Copyright © 2003 Massachusetts Medical Society.

www.nejm.org

april 10, 2003

The New England Journal of Medicine
Downloaded from nejm.org at BOSTON UNIVERSITY on November 29, 2021. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.
Copyright © 2003 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.

