Health Policy and Technology 10 (2021) 100543

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Health Policy and Technology
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/hlpt

Original Article

The implications of the California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA) on
healthcare organizations: Lessons learned from early
compliance experiences
Pavankumar Mulgund a, *, Banashri Pavankumar Mulgund a, b, Raj Sharman a, c,
Raghvendra Singh a, d
a

School of Management, University at Buffalo, United States
LLB(Hons) UB School of Management, Unites States
c
Professor School of Management, University at Buffalo, Unites States
d
UB School of Management, University at Buffalo, Unites States
b

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
CCPA
HIPPA
Data privacy
Consumer health information

Objective: In 2018, California legislators passed the California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA), a digital privacy
regulation conferring consumers more control over their online personal information. CCPA is a significant
regulation overseeing technology companies’ data collection and usage practices in the United States. This article
analyzes CCPA and its implications on healthcare organizations. We elaborate on the compliance challenges that
have emerged due to the interplay of the CCPA with the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
(HIPAA) from legal and technical/operational perspectives.
Methods: Qualitative methods comprising semi-structured expert interviews, qualitative data coding, and analysis
were used to explore the perceptions of the practitioners on various dimensions of the policy and to obtain in­
sights from the field.
Results: Our findings indicated that California’s healthcare organizations faced several legal and technological
challenges in complying with CCPA. A lack of regulatory clarity and a low likelihood of enforcement emerged as
two major themes of legal concern. Poor data discovery and inventory processes, lack of sophisticated digital
infrastructure, the interaction between technology and privacy professionals, and the high cost of compliance
emerged as significant technological hurdles to CCPA compliance.
Conclusions: Despite considerable ambiguity around the scope and jurisdiction of CCPA in the healthcare sector,
healthcare organizations may be subject to CCPA, primarily when they collect personally identifiable informa­
tion that is not protected health information. Such organizations may need to comply with both regulations.
Furthermore, it is in their best interest to develop compliance plans proactively rather than being caught in the
quandary of last-minute implementation or expensive litigation.

Public Interest SummaryInspired by GDPR and recognizing the need for a broader interpretation of privacy issues in USA California passed the California Consumer
Privacy Act (CCPA). Although the regulation was created to cater to consumer industries such as ad tech, retail, and e-commerce, but it also impacts the healthcare
sector in interesting ways. In this article, we examine the requirements of CCPA to understand its effect on different types of healthcare organizations. We elaborate
on the interplay between the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) and the CCPA. California’s healthcare organizations faced several legal
and technological challenges in complying with CCPA. A lack of regulatory clarity and low likelihood of enforcement emerged as two major themes of legal concern.
Poor data discovery and inventory processes, lack of sophisticated digital infrastructure, the interaction between technology and privacy professionals, and the high
cost of compliance emerged as significant technology and operational hurdles to CCPA compliance.
* Corresponding author at: Management Science and Systems, School of Management, University at Buffalo, 333 Jacobs Management Center, Buffalo, NY 142604000, Unites States.
E-mail address: pmulgund@buffalo.com (P. Mulgund).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hlpt.2021.100543
Available online 25 June 2021
2211-8837/© 2021 Fellowship of Postgraduate Medicine. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

P. Mulgund et al.

Health Policy and Technology 10 (2021) 100543

Introduction

Background

Digital privacy has assumed great significance, as web and mobile
applications continue to collect and leverage online personal informa­
tion to promote their business interests. However, unlike the European
General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) [1], the United States does
not have one comprehensive data privacy regulation governing data
collection and use [2]. Several federal and state regulations govern
various sectors and types of personal information. For instance,
considering the sensitivity of health information and the potentially
catastrophic consequences of its breach, the protection of health infor­
mation is governed by the Health Insurance Portability and Account­
ability Act (HIPAA). HIPAA ensures that the organization collecting and
storing health information has the necessary processes and technology
controls to protect health information. It also provides legal recourse to
victims in the event of a breach [3]. However, such specific regulations
are too narrow and quite limited.
Inspired by GDPR and recognizing the need for a broader interpre­
tation of privacy issues, California passed the California Consumer Pri­
vacy Act (CCPA) [4]. It is a landmark regulation that will have a
significant impact on the 40 million residents of the state of California
and its 500,000 businesses, including the 10% of Fortune 1000 com­
panies, which are some of the most profitable and cutting-edge tech­
nology firms [5]. Although the regulation was created to cater to
consumer industries, such as ad tech, retail, and e-commerce, it impacts
the healthcare sector in interesting ways [4,5]. In this article, we
examine the requirements of CCPA to understand its effect on different
types of healthcare organizations. We explore the legal and technolog­
ical compliance challenges that emerge from the interplay between the
HIPAA and the CCPA.

The CCPA provides California citizens with a higher degree of control
over their online personal information by providing rights over their
online personal data and how companies use it. The act outlines certain
restrictions and exemptions to specific data categories. The CCPA
became effective on January 1, 2020, and organizations are expected to
have data protection policies to comply with the new legislation [6].
CCPA applies to for-profit organizations doing business in California
that collect and process consumers’ personal information [7] if they
meet at least one of the following criteria:
Annual gross revenue is greater than $25,000,000.
Engages in the purchase, sale, or transfer of personal information
from more than 50,000 consumers, devices, or households.
Derives more than 50% of annual revenues from selling consumers’
personal information [8].
The act defines ’consumer’ [9] as any individual domiciled in Cali­
fornia, including those living outside for temporary or transitional
purposes. It also defines the term personal information [10] as informa­
tion that can be reasonably linked, directly, or indirectly, to a consumer
or household. Personal consumer information collected by the business
can include the following [11]:
• Consumers’ personal information—demographic, financial, digital
• Sources of personal information
• The purpose (business or commercial) of collecting or selling per­
sonal information
• Categories of third parties with which the business shares personal
information
• Individual fields of information collected about the consumer
As presented in Fig. 1, CCPA describes various types of personal in­
formation. However, CCPA exempts publicly available information,

Fig. 1. Classification of Personal Information in CCPA.
2

P. Mulgund et al.

Health Policy and Technology 10 (2021) 100543

which is defined as "information that is lawfully made available from
federal, state, or local government records but not if the purpose of data
use is incompatible with its stated purpose" [12]. Protected health in­
formation collected by a covered entity governed by the Confidentiality
of Medical Information Act and Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act (HIPAA) is exempt from CCPA [13].
Furthermore, CCPA does not apply to nonprofits or California state
and local governmental entities. Given the breadth of the CCPA’s defi­
nition of business and consumer, companies across the US that collect
user data and deploy cookies will be subject to compliance with the
CCPA.
Consumers have been provided with several rights under CCPA,
including the following:

professional social networking platform ‘LinkedIn.’ From the shortlisted
pool, we chose participants with substantial expertise in the intersection
of digital privacy and information systems in the healthcare domain.
Along with professional experience, every participant possessed expertlevel certifications in digital privacy, information systems assurance,
and healthcare information technology. There were no restrictions on
the nature of their employment (consultant or employee) or the type of
organization they worked for (management consulting, legal consulting,
and technology service organizations). In total, we conducted 19 expert
interviews. Table 1 provides the details of the participant’s expertise.
Data collection through expert interviews
To facilitate smooth yet rigorous interviews with the experts, we
created an interview guide. We pilot tested the interview questions with
an expert researcher in information privacy, gathered relevant inputs,
and updated the interview questions accordingly. Furthermore, based
on the recommendations, the questions were framed in an unbiased tone
[23]. The interview guide covered a range of topics related to our
research aims. The interview questions are presented in Table 2.
Interviews were conducted virtually using Zoom and Google meet­
ings between December 2019 and August 2020, with each session last­
ing between 60- and 90-min. Interviews were recorded upon consent,
transcribed, and evaluated for accuracy before being analyzed. Person­
ally, identifiable data were removed from transcriptions, and pseudo­
nyms were used for participants. A team of three researchers
(comprising the interviewer and two notetakers) interviewed the re­
spondents and collected expert opinions. Interviewing as a team enabled
better data collection, with one person facilitating the interview and the
other two taking notes independently. This style of interviewing also
helped aggregate the replies of the interviewees.

• Disclosure [14] and access [15]
Collection, sale, or disclosure of consumers’ personal information for
a business purpose must be revealed to consumers [16]. A company
collecting personal information should disclose the information
collected in the last 12 months in response to a valid consumer request.
• Deletion
Businesses and their third-party service providers must delete the
consumer’s personal information collected in the last 12 months in
response to a legitimate consumer request [17]. This includes the not
only the personal information provided by the consumers, but also
personal information collected from other sources.
• Nondiscrimination
Businesses must not discriminate against consumers who exercise
any of their rights under CCPA. However, they may offer financial in­
centives to consumers to collect personal information with prior consent
[18].

Data analysis
Employing the classic grounded theory approach to data analysis
[24], we coded the data in three stages: open, axial, and selective cod­
ing, as presented in Fig. 2. In stage 1, we deconstructed interview
transcripts into keywords and phrases called ’open codes.’
Subsequently, we grouped the keywords and phrases into ideas and
concepts called ’axial codes.’ Thereafter, these concepts were further
grouped into higher-order themes or categories called ’selective codes.’
The concepts and categories were continually refined by constantly

• Opt-out and website requirements
Businesses selling consumer personal information to other businesses
and third-party organizations must notify consumers about the sale of
their personal information and provide them with an option to opt-out.
Businesses should also provide a ’Do not sell my personal information’
[19] link on the website’s home page to enable easy access to the
’opt-out’ option. Companies should seek affirmative authorization from
consumers between 13 and 16 years of age and parental consent for
consumers below 13 [20].

Table 1
Participant expertise.
Experience in years

• Privacy policy requirements

0–10
10–20
20–30
30–40
Organization Type
Management Consulting
Technology Consulting
Health IT product organizations
Law firms
Job Titles
Managing Director Founder
Director
Project/Engagement Manager
Lawyer/Counsel
Data Security/ Privacy Engineer
# of certifications held
Data privacy-related:
CDPSE, CIPP, CIPT, CIPP-US, privacy law specialist, CDPO
Information Security:
CISSP, CISA, CRISC, CISM
Health IT-related:
CPHMIS, CAHMIS, HCISSP, CHTS, HIPAA

Businesses must describe their online privacy policy or any
California-specific description of consumer privacy rights. The policy
statement must be updated at least once a year [21].
Businesses that violate the rules specified in CCPA will be subject to
an injunction. Further, they will be liable to pay the penalty not
exceeding $2500 for each violation or $7500 for each deliberate viola­
tion [22].
Methods and materials
Sampling
We chose participants for interviews using purposive sampling to
enable an in-depth exploration of both legal and technology implica­
tions. We shortlisted several experts from diverse areas, such as health
law, digital privacy, and information systems security. Potential candi­
dates were contacted with short recruitment messages and posts on the
3

5
6
5
3
5
5
4
5
2
5
3
5
4
11
10
3

P. Mulgund et al.

Health Policy and Technology 10 (2021) 100543

Table 2
Expert interview guide.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

Table 3
An example open coding.

What is your experience with information assurance, security, or regulatory
compliance?
How are healthcare organizations affected by CCPA? What data is covered under
CCPA, and what data is not?
How will CCPA apply to Protected Health Information (PHI) as defined by
HIPAA?
How will CCPA apply to personally identifiable information that is not PHI? How
does CCPA affect the de-identified data fields?
How does CCPA apply to companies that are not covered by HIPAA, like health
and fitness app?
What healthcare data privacy issues are not well understood under CCPA?
What are some of the well understood data privacy issues under the ambit of
CCPA?
What are some of the challenges that organizations face during the transition
period?
How do companies ensure CCPA compliance for vendors?

Transcript 1
“HIPAA is narrower in scope and is limited only to the protected health information.
CCPA does not apply to PHI covered by HIPAA. Also, an important difference
between HIPAA and a CCPA is that HIPPA does not permit the person who owns the
data to limit the use of data for the express purpose only. CCPA, on the other hand,
provides consumers that liberty. For example, health firms often sell protected
patient information to third-party companies for advertising and other purposes for
a fee. CCPA provides consumers with a means to control such use of data. However,
there are areas that we are not entirely sure about, like vendor management,
reporting, etc.”
Transcript details
Open codes
HIPAA is narrower in scope and is limited only to
- Coverage of different data
the protected health information.
points
HIPPA does not permit the person who owns the
- Data ownership differences
data to limit the use of data for the express
- Greater granularity of
purpose only. CCPA, on the other hand, provides
permissions
consumers with liberty.
- Purpose-based access
For example, health firms often sell non-protected
- Example highlighting
patient information to third-party companies for
differences
advertising and other purposes for a fee. CCPA
provides consumers a means to control such use of
data but HIPAA does not.”
However, there are areas that we are not entirely
- Emphasizing the need for
certain like vendor management, reporting etc.
more information

comparing the new codes to existing codes. This process explored subtle
differences and nuanced connections among the codes, enhancing their
precision. Data collection and analysis were performed simultaneously,
with insights from the data analysis guiding the choice of the next
sample. Further, throughout the data collection and analysis, we
recorded our reflections and critical insights in the form of memos that
were integrated with the concepts and categories to arrive at our key
findings. We illustrate the process of open coding with an example in
Table 3.
We further grouped the open codes into higher-level concepts (axial
codes), and using these concepts, categories (selective codes) were
created. An example of mapping of open, axial, and selective codes is
presented in Table 4.
We intertwined the data collection and analysis with the results of
data analysis, informing and guiding our sample selection for in­
terviews. We discuss the findings of this study in the following section.

Table 4
An example of mapping codes to concepts and categories.

Results
Given the focus of this study on legal and technical challenges of
CCPA on healthcare organizations as perceived by professionals in the
field, six different themes emerged from the analysis of interview data.
Two legal themes that emerged were 1) lack of regulatory clarity and 2)
the likelihood of its enforcement.
1 Lack of regulatory clarity
A broad range of healthcare organizations processing health data
across the US and the world fall under the ambit of CCPA. Adopting a
broad definition of personal information, CCPA carves out exceptions for
specific purposes or types of well-regulated data. This approach has
created ambiguity and led to situations in which the new requirements
are inconsistent with prior regulations. Although the personal health

Phase 1 (open coding)

Phase 2 (axial coding)

Phase 3 (selective
coding)

Coverage of different data
points
Data ownership
differences
Greater granularity of
permissions to use data
Purpose based access
Data use transparency
Emphasizing the need for
more information
Unintended for healthcare
organizations
No instance of
enforcement
Structured data sources
Unstructured data sources
Nonproduction datasets
Ghost databases
Use of GRC tools
Unstructured data
retrieval
Incompatibility of
Automatic tagging

Jurisdictional scope

Regulatory clarity

Fig. 2. Data collection and analysis process.
4

Overlaps and complements
between the two regulations

Missing details
Low priority in the
enforcement of CCPA

Low likelihood of
enforcement

Inventory of Data sources

Challenges of data
discovery and
inventory

Difficulty of Data retrieval

P. Mulgund et al.

Health Policy and Technology 10 (2021) 100543

information covered under HIPAA is exempt from CCPA, several
personally identifiable data elements collected by healthcare organiza­
tions are not PHI. Whether CCPA applies to such data is a common
source of confusion.
CCPA explicitly exempts the following types of health information:

you provide. And is that an in-kind contribution, and does that constitute a
sale? That remains to be unknown. My company does not sell data. But I am
sure that at some point, they will argue that no matter what, if you share data,
that in some way you sell it.
Quote from data privacy and security attorney with
13 years of legal experience and CIPP-US certification

• Medical information, such as patient medical history and healthcare
plan data covered under the Confidentiality of Medical Information
Act (CMIA)
• PHI covered under the HIPAA. It is individually identifiable infor­
mation related to the individual’s physical or mental health or
healthcare payment information.
• Clinical trial information and FDA requirements
• Aggregate consumer information or de-identified information

1 Likelihood of enforcement
There is some debate about the likelihood of the enforcement of
CCPA in the context of healthcare organizations. On the one end, some
privacy and legal professionals acknowledge that while CCPA could
apply to data collected by HIPAA-compliant healthcare organizations,
they also highlight the low likelihood of its enforcement. According to
them, the act’s primary objective was to bring digital consumer com­
panies, ad tech, and retail organizations that collect a large volume of
consumer data under its ambit. The healthcare organizations may not be
a priority for enforcement agencies, but they could still be targets of
expensive litigation by customers looking for non-compliant organiza­
tions1. The following excerpt highlights this issue:
In for-profit healthcare companies, when only personally identifiable in­
formation is captured, such as in customer relationship management or a
marketing application, it is legally covered under CCPA. However, we do not
believe it will be enforced. We are not seeing enforcement. It was not really
who the law (CCPA) was targeted at.
Quote from a senior manager compliance and data privacy with 12 years
of experience in regulatory compliance and CISM and CISSP certifications.
On the other hand, as presented in the excerpt below, some legal
professionals believe that the likelihood of expensive litigation in
healthcare is much higher because several law firms specialize in liti­
gating healthcare organizations on data privacy and HIPAA-related
breaches. For such firms, CCPA compliance will be a logical extension.
Therefore, it is in the best interests of healthcare organizations to be
proactively compliant.
Look at what has happened in the last few weeks. CCPA litigations are
piling up. In my opinion, litigants will use CCPA to file cases on healthcare
firms in the near term; in the longer term, it will depend on the verdicts of the
first few cases.
Quote from a data privacy lawyer with 19 years of legal experience and
CIPM certification
In addition to the two legal issues, the four emergent technologyrelated themes include 1) challenges of data discovery and inventory;
2) lack of sophisticated and robust digital infrastructure; 3) coordination
between technical and privacy professionals; and 4) the high cost of
compliance without an equitable ROI.

However, as illustrated by the transcript below, several types of data
collected by HIPAA-compliant healthcare organizations potentially fall
within the jurisdiction of the CCPA, but there is significant regulatory
ambiguity around such data.
A lot of times, when you actually mention CCPA, it is applied in the
absence of HIPAA. HIPAA does not really apply to Enterprise or B2B. So, the
scope is very limited. I see companies they get confused because when we talk
about collecting health information, whether they are subjected people. For
instance, companies collecting temperature, footsteps, and activity trackers
do not fall under HIPAA but are covered under CCPA.
Quote from a director of privacy and protection in a health IT product
company with 15 years of experience and CIPP, CIPT certification
The following data points are some examples of such regulatory
ambiguity:
• Employee data, except that which is owned by a covered entity as
defined by HIPAA
• Non-PHI information of consumers collected by the covered entity
• Information received from non-HIPAA-covered entities by business
associates
• Healthcare providers who do not engage in standard electronic
transactions, such as cash pay services, as defined by HIPAA
Covered entities such as health plans, for instance, are increasingly
leveraging non-PHI data, such as marital status, income, and television
usage patterns, to assess patient risk for certain health conditions. Such
use of data elements not traditionally classified as PHI by covered en­
tities for making health-related assessments has blurred the difference
between PHI as defined by HIPAA and personal information subject to
CCPA, raising several regulatory concerns.
Another source of regulatory ambiguity stems from entities not
covered by HIPAA or CMIA, such as clinical research organizations,
biotechnology firms, wearables, fitness, and lifestyle apps, personal
health record vendors, genetic test services, and assisted living facilities
and services. The issue of jurisdiction of the CCPA on wearables and
consumer health apps is especially common. Although wearable tech­
nologies and digital companies collect various personal healthcare data,
including activity and sleep tracking, heart rates, blood glucose levels,
menstrual cycles, and sexual activities, they are not covered under
HIPAA, unless an HIPAA-covered entity is also involved. Therefore, such
companies fall under the purview of the CCPA.
Further, the definition of ’sale of data’ is another point of confusion.
The traditional definition of sale—the exchange of information for
money—is covered under the CCPA. However, there is a need to inter­
pret the broader definition of sales, such as data-sharing agreements
between healthcare and non-healthcare organizations and data transfer
with other agencies. The following interview transcript highlights this
issue:
Yeah, so probably the biggest confusion is what actually constitutes the
sale of data there. You know that you may not sell data. OK. However, you
may have a, you know, you get a discount somewhere else for the data that

1 Challenges of data discovery and inventory
Making an inventory of all the consumers’ data is the most complex
technical and operational challenge that CCPA presents. In response to
consumer requests, organizations should track and retrieve all consumer
data. While it seems simple, discovering all consumer data is incredibly
difficult to accomplish. The complexity arises because of the diversity of
sources and types of data. Data is stored in several sources, including
structured databases on cloud and local servers, but also on unstructured
data files, such as PDFs, text files, spreadsheets, and images located in
shared folders and individual computers. Some data may be stored as
paper records. This challenge is most pronounced in healthcare orga­
nizations, where a large proportion of data is stored in unstructured data
files and paper records. Prior studies note that nearly 80% of the clinical
data generated by healthcare transactions is unstructured in nature and
includes written text, radiological and X ray images, photos, pathology

1
CCPA allows a private right of action only for certain cases of "data
breaches".

5

P. Mulgund et al.

Health Policy and Technology 10 (2021) 100543

slides, streaming device data, PDF files, faxes, and emails [25,26]. The
following excerpts highlight this concern:
Where there are the most struggle, where they have the most difficult
is not in putting up a consumer portal in asking for the request (DSAR)
nor doing the basic audit tracking; it is the actual retrieval of consumer
data itself. The reason that is so difficult is because it is both in struc­
tured as in relational databases such as Oracle, MY SQL could be in
Mongo DB, in some type of database, and or it is sitting out in un­
structured files in Word, Excel, PDFs, and finding that data is virtually
impossible manually. When we have terabytes of data and we get an
individual consumer’s request for deletion, most of them (companies)
fail there.
Quote from chief information security officer with health IT product
company with 30 years of experience and CISSP and CISM certifications.
Many organizations also suffer from the existence of a large number
of "Ghost Databases." On a daily basis, engineers often create and use
production data dumps to test their code on staging and user acceptance
test environments without any formal documentation. Such databases,
over time, become good candidates for ghost databases, as noted in the
following transcript:
Today, they have connectors into their core systems using API or SQL
statements to those databases to retrieve the data. But those are very
limited, and unfortunately, organizations have 100s, if not 1,000s, of
other databases that they do not even know about.
Quote from senior privacy consultant with 8 years of experience and CIPT
and CISSP certifications

CCPA and HIPAA and may develop inadequate privacy controls. The
following excerpt highlights this challenge.
Frankly, privacy people are not like cybersecurity people. They tend to be
attorneys and do not understand how technology or complex databases work.
Translating technical issues or concerns about data processes to them is a
challenge Today. It is a solvable problem; however, it is still a problem today.
A director of product management with 11 years of experience in
healthcare IT products and CPHIMS certification.
1 The high cost of compliance without an equitable ROI
The initial cost of compliance ranges from $50,000 at the lower
segment to more than $2,000,000 at the top end. The cost of compliance
is associated with the operational and information technology costs of
implementing controls, training staff members, and developing
improved record-keeping processes. The cost of compliance is much
higher in hospitals and other health agencies that do not have a mature
digital infrastructure. Furthermore, given the complexity of health in­
formation systems and the diversity of stakeholders, costs escalate in a
healthcare enterprise without an equitable return on investment, as
presented in the transcript below.
CCPA is an expensive undertaking for many organizations to comply
with. Massive investments in newer technologies, operations, personnel,
training, and audits need to be taken into account.
A founder and CEO of a health IT consulting firm with 22 years of
experience

1 A master data management system that provides a universal subject
view of multiple data subjects, such as customers, employees, and
vendors, could be a potential solution. However, most healthcare
organizations are constrained in terms of the time and budget to
invest in such systems.
Lack of sophisticated and robust digital infrastructure

Discussion
Our study extends the line of research on data privacy regulations
and their impact on healthcare organizations [27,28]. Much of the
existing research on CCPA highlights its scope regarding eligibility
criteria, exemptions, and penalties for non-compliant organizations.
Some papers have also explored its implications for ad tech [29] and
e-commerce organizations [30]. Prior work has also pointed to several
categories of data collected by healthcare organizations that are not
subject to HIPAA but are covered under CCPA [31]. Our study is unique
as it offers a firsthand account of the legal and technical challenges
involved in interpreting the regulation and developing privacy controls
in the context of healthcare organizations as perceived by professionals
in the field.
The vision of the CCPA is to provide consumers with greater control
over their personal information and empower them to seek legal
recourse in its breach and misuse. This vision transcends business do­
mains and applies broadly to personal information. However, this
regulation leads to some interesting and perhaps unintended interplay
with HIPAA regulations in healthcare organizations. Therefore, it makes
sense that regulatory ambiguity emerges as a frequent legal challenge.
Furthermore, as other states, such as New York, Nevada, Virginia,
Florida, Illinois, New Hampshire, and Washington, legislate their pri­
vacy regulations [32], issues relating to regulatory clarity will only
become more complex. The interplay of these privacy regulations across
states is an area for further research. We speculate that, as with the
European Union GDPR, the US might at some point initiate a US-wide
data privacy regulation; however, until that happens, there will be
interesting regulatory challenges.
Furthermore, California privacy regulations are evolving and
changing quickly. In November 2020, California passed the new data
privacy bill called ‘California Privacy Rights Act (CPRA),’ which amends
and expands the current CCPA. Several new changes have been pro­
posed, including creating a new information category called sensitive
personal information, changing CCPA scope, providing new rights to
consumers, and establishing a government enforcement agency. Such
rapid changes to privacy regulations have also led to some regulatory
ambiguity.
Another common area of regulatory confusion revolves around the

Unlike consumer-facing digital companies, healthcare organizations
usually do not possess a state-of-the art digital infrastructure. Healthcare
organizations, being conservative consumers of information technology,
have been slow to adopt the latest technologies, such as service-oriented
architecture, cloud, and IOT. Furthermore, hospitals and healthcare
agencies typically maintain their own “on-premise” data centers, whose
technology infrastructure may not be sophisticated enough to adhere to
this regulation. Even though several technology vendors have developed
API components that assist in the automatic tagging of consumer data
fields, making it easy to track and purge consumer data, healthcare or­
ganizations may not leverage these tools due to their limited ability to
integrate with them, as highlighted by the transcript below:
Organizations that use conventional bare metal infrastructure or un­
structured databases but are now migrating to the cloud or other new tech­
nology will face the challenges. Because these organizations do not have the
ability to integrate with tools that can tag the data, they cannot run queries
that allow them to purge all the data records easily.
A senior security and privacy engineer with 11 years of experience and
CIPT and CISSP certifications.
1 Coordination between technology and privacy professionals
Most privacy officers are lawyers with experience in interpreting
laws, but they often lack the training and experience to work with
technology professionals. Similarly, IT professionals are beginning to
realize that privacy professionals typically are not as technology-focused
as cybersecurity and IT risk professionals. Managing expectations and
ensuring meaningful communication between information system de­
signers and privacy professionals remains a challenge. A minor change
in expectations from the legal side could substantially impact the tech­
nological aspects of the project. On the other hand, IT engineers may not
appreciate some of the regulatory nuances of the interplay between
6

P. Mulgund et al.

Health Policy and Technology 10 (2021) 100543

wearable and mobile health applications industry. The data collected
from these organizations were hitherto not subject to any regulatory
compliance. However, with the legislation of the CCPA, data collected
by mobile applications and wearable manufacturers potentially fall
under its ambit. In addition, initiatives such as project Nightingale from
Google, which intends to collect and process millions of patient records
using AI and machine learning methods to make recommendations for
improving patient outcomes, may be impacted by the CCPA. Further, the
COVID-19 pandemic has exacerbated the situation, as various organi­
zations are making enhanced use of technology to capture personal and
health-related information, such as temperature scans, biometric data,
location information, contact tracing, prior test results, antibody tests,
and travel history, without establishing adequate data privacy safe­
guards. In particular, strong concerns have been expressed about spe­
cific contact tracing applications that did not meet privacy standards
[33,34]. Although such practices have come under scrutiny, the issue of
whether these data points are subject to the CCPA remains unclear.
Further, our study also finds that, contrary to the expectations of in­
dustry leaders, the deadline for the CCPA enforcement has not been
extended [35], making it necessary for businesses to develop compliance
measures sooner than later.
From an implementation perspective, our study finds that the more
visible components of CCPA compliance, such as building a website or
setting up a helpline service for consumers to raise data access requests,
are easy to accomplish. However, the task of ensuring an accurate in­
ventory of all the consumer data collected and stored within the orga­
nization will be a challenging endeavor. Vendor management and
collaboration issues between lawyers and IT teams surface as two other
implementation challenges. Further, our study also notes that smaller
healthcare organizations, especially those managing their on-premise
data infrastructures, may not possess sophisticated technology infra­
structure to deploy plug-and-play compliance engines, making them
especially vulnerable to data breaches.

Ethical approval
Not required
Declaration of Competing Interest
None declared
Acknowledgement
We would like to thank the experts for consenting to participate in
the interviews.
References
[1] Blanke JM. Protection for ‘inferences drawn’: a comparison between the general
data protection regulation and the California consumer privacy act. Glob Privacy
Law Rev 2020;1(2). https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3518164. https://doi.org/.
[2] Solove DJ. A brief history of information privacy law. Proskauer on privacy.
Practising Law Institute 2016. GWU Law School Public Law Research Paper No.
215.
[3] Baumer D, Earp JB, Payton FC. Privacy of medical records: IT implications of
HIPAA. ACM SIGCAS Comput Soc 2000;30(4):40–7. https://doi.org/10.1145/
572260.572261.
[4] Harding EL, Vanto JJ, Clark R, Hannah Ji L, Ainsworth SC. Understanding the
scope and impact of the California consumer privacy act of 2018. J Data Prot
Privacy 2019;2(3):234–53.
[5] Helveston MN. Reining in commercial exploitation of consumer data. Penn St L Rev
2018;123:667. https://elibrary.law.psu.edu/pslr/vol123/iss3/3.
[6] Saquella AJ. Personal data vulnerability: constitutional issues with the California
Consumer Privacy Act. Jurimetrics 2020;60(2):215–45.
[7] Goldman E. An introduction to the California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA). Santa
Clara Univ; 2020. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3211013. Legal Studies Research
Paper.https://doi.org/.
[8] California Civil Code. The California Consumer Privacy Act of 2018 Cal. Civ. Code §
1798.140(c)(1). Cal Civ Code § 1798.140(c)(2).
[9] California Civil Code. The California Consumer Privacy Act of 2018 Cal. Civ. Code
1798. 140(g).
[10] California Civil Code. The California Consumer Privacy Act of 2018 Cal. Civ. Code
§ 1798. 140(o)(1).
[11] California Civil Code. The California Consumer Privacy Act of 2018 Cal. Civ. Code
§ 1798. 80(e).
[12] California Civil Code. The California Consumer Privacy Act of 2018 Cal. Civ. Code
§ 1798.
[13] Rothstein MA, Tovino SA. California takes the lead on data privacy law. Hastings
Cent Rep 2019;49(5):4–5. https://doi.org/10.1002/hast.1042.
[14] California Civil Code. The California Consumer Privacy Act of 2018. Cal. Civ. Code
§ 1798. 115.
[15] California Civil Code. The California Consumer Privacy Act of 2018. Cal. Civ. Code
§ 1798.100(d).
[16] California Civil Code. The California Consumer Privacy Act of 2018. Cal. Civ. Code
§ 1798.110.
[17] California Civil Code. The California Consumer Privacy Act of 2018. Cal. Civ §
1798.105.
[18] California Civil Code. The California Consumer Privacy Act of 2018. Cal. Civ §
1798.125(1).
[19] California Civil Code. The California Consumer Privacy Act of 2018. Cal. Civ. Code
§ 1798.135.
[20] California Civil Code. The California Consumer Privacy Act of 2018. Cal. Civ. Code
§ 1798.120(d).
[21] California Civil Code. The California Consumer Privacy Act of 2018. Cal. Civ. Code
§ 1798.130 (5).
[22] California Civil Code. The California Consumer Privacy Act of 2018.Cal. Civ. Code
§ 1798.155.
[23] Rowley J. Conducting research interviews. Manage Res Rev 2012;23. ISSN: 20408269.
[24] Kallio H, Pietilä AM, Johnson M, Kangasniemi M. Systematic methodological
review: developing a framework for a qualitative semi-structured interview guide.
J Adv Nurs 2016;72(12):2954–65. https://doi.org/10.1111/jan.13031.
[25] Augustine DP. Leveraging big data analytics and Hadoop in developing India’s
healthcare services. Int J Comput Appl 2014;89(16):44–50. Mar 26.
[26] Assale M, Dui LG, Cina A, Seveso A, Cabitza F. The revival of the notes field:
leveraging the unstructured content in electronic health records. Front Med 2019
Apr 17;6:66.
[27] McGraw D, Mandl KD. Privacy protections to encourage use of health-relevant
digital data in a learning health system. NPJ Digit Med 2021;4(1). https://doi.org/
10.1038/s41746-020-00362-8. 1-1.
[28] Kwon J, Johnson ME. Health-care security strategies for data protection and
regulatory compliance. J Manage Inf Syst 2013;30(2):41–66. https://doi.org/
10.2753/MIS0742-1222300202.

Limitations
As with any qualitative study, the interpretive nature of this study
limits the generalizability of its results. However, because the primary
objective is to explore the unintended challenges that the CCPA presents
for HIPAA-compliant healthcare organizations, we provide a rich
narrative from legal and technology perspectives. The readers are asked
to exercise caution when assessing the transferability of this work to
non-healthcare organizations. Furthermore, this study’s results apply
only to a small subset of healthcare organizations that fall under the
purview of CCPA and HIPAA. Future studies could validate the findings
of this work by leveraging other research methods. We hope that our
work will provide an impetus for future studies in this area.
Conclusion
CCPA is a landmark regulation that provides consumers with greater
control over their data. While it was regulated for digital consumer
companies, online advertising, and retail industries, its definition is not
confined to a particular industry. However, the institution of CCPA has
led to some unintended effects on healthcare organizations. In this
study, we present the challenges perceived by technology and legal
teams. Amid all these challenges, it is prudent for these organizations to
proactively comply with CCPA rather than getting involved in expensive
legal battles. A clear understanding of their jurisdiction and exemptions
will help organizations comply effectively. Further, studying the eco­
nomic, technological, and operational effects of CCPA is vital to devel­
oping best compliance practices.
Funding
None
7

P. Mulgund et al.

Health Policy and Technology 10 (2021) 100543

[29] Maalouf M, Rozen M. CCPA reflections on the eve of enforcement and in the midst
of a global pandemic. Comput Law Rev Int 2020;21(3):65–9. https://doi.org/
10.9785/cri-2020-210302.
[30] Brazhnik, T. Cookies in e-commerce: balancing privacy and business. SSRN
2366262. 2013. https://doi.org/ 10.2139/ssrn.2366262.
[31] Harris R. Forging a path toward meaningful digital privacy: data monetization and
the CCPA. Loyola Los Angeles Law Rev. 2020;54(1):197.
[32] Zachary RW, Andrew JS, Justin PW, Sarah AS. CCPA enforcement begins amid
pandemic and regulatory uncertainty. Natl Law Rev 2020. XI:113 [.1], htt
ps://www.natlawreview.com/article/ccpa-enforcement-begins-amid-pandemic-an
d-regulatory-uncertainty (Accessed on April 19th, 2021).

[33] Bradford L, Aboy M, Liddell K. COVID-19 contact tracing apps: a stress test for
privacy, the GDPR, and data protection regimes. J Law Biosci 2020;7(1):lsaa034.
https://doi.org/10.1093/jlb/lsaa034.
[34] Sowmiya B, Abhijith VS, Sudersan S, Sundar RS, Thangavel M, Varalakshmi P.
A survey on security and privacy issues in contact tracing application of Covid-19.
SN Comput Sci 2021;2(3). https://doi.org/10.1007/s42979-021-00520-z. 1-1.
[35] Robins M. American privacy law at the dawn of a new decade (and the CCPA and
COVID-19): Overview and practitioner critique. Marquette Intell Prop Law Rev
2020.

8

