smart cities
Article

Citizens’ Data Privacy in China: The State of the Art of the
Personal Information Protection Law (PIPL)
Igor Calzada 1,2
1

2

Fulbright Scholar-In-Residence (S-I-R), US-UK Fulbright Commission, California State University,
Bakersfield (CSUB), Institute for Basque Studies (IBS), 9001 Stockdale Hwy, Bakersfield, CA 9331, USA;
calzadai@cardiff.ac.uk; Tel.: +44-7887661925
Wales Institute of Social and Economic Research and Data (WISERD), Social Science Research
Park (sbarc/spark), School of Social Sciences, Cardiff University, Maindy Road, Cathays,
Cardiff CF24 4HQ, Wales, UK

Abstract: The Personal Information Protection Law (PIPL) was launched on 1 November 2021 in
China. This article provides a state-of-the-art review of PIPL through a policy analysis. This paper
aims to compare the three main worldwide data privacy paradigms that exist at present: (i) the
General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) in the E.U., (ii) the California Consumer Privacy Act
(CCPA) in the U.S., and (iii) PIPL in China. The research question is twofold: (i) how will PIPL
affect the data privacy of Chinese citizens and consequently, (ii) how will PIPL influence the global
digital order, particularly paralleling the existing GDPR and CCPA? In the first section, this article
introduces the topic of data privacy as a global concern, followed in the second section by an in-depth
policy context analysis of PIPL and a literature review on privacy that elucidates in particular the
impact of the Social Credit System (SCS). In the third section, a comparative benchmarking is carried
out between the GDPR, CCPA, and PIPL. Methodologically, policy documents around PIPL will
be analyzed. In the fourth section, the case study of Shenzhen will be examined by undertaking a
multi-stakeholder analysis following the Penta Helix framework. The article concludes by responding
to the research questions, acknowledging limitations, and presenting future research avenues.
Citation: Calzada, I. Citizens’ Data
Privacy in China: The State of the Art
of the Personal Information

Keywords: PIPL; data privacy; China; Social Credit System; smart cities; GDPR; CCPA; benchmarking; DAOs; Shenzhen

Protection Law (PIPL). Smart Cities
2022, 5, 1129–1150. https://doi.org/
10.3390/smartcities5030057
Academic Editor: Pierluigi Siano
Received: 12 August 2022
Accepted: 5 September 2022
Published: 8 September 2022
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.

Copyright:

© 2022 by the author.

Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).

1. Introduction: Data Privacy as a Global Concern
Broadly speaking, a smart city should be a city that utilizes data science and technology to gather data, improve citizen life, and manage resources effectively and efficiently.
Technology, embodied through so-called smart cities, has been therefore integrated into
nearly all aspects of public and private urban life, promising opportunities to optimize key
components of human settlements including mobility, energy, water, healthcare, education,
housing, public services, public space, physical infrastructure, and the environment [1].
However, over the last several years, a debate has emerged worldwide about citizens’
data privacy issues [2,3]. With the advent of big data, the value chain of such data seems
effective in smart cities, which cannot be understood without the technological success of
the smart city [4]. Big data is also closely connected to the way citizens can be surveilled [5].
Data sharing, trust, governance, stewardship, and co-operatives are, among other things,
several related notions that have arisen around the idea of the city as a platform [6]. Citizens
should not only be considered data providers insofar as their lives may depend increasingly
on their decisions regarding their data [7]. However, we still witness the same promise of
data-driven cities attempting to materialize by a burgeoning compliance with data privacy
needs. Despite the sensorization of smart cities, they have created an ongoing industry,
which, despite its advances, has raised privacy concerns, sparking a variety of regulatory
frameworks worldwide [8]. As Véliz argues, surveillance is creeping into every part of our

Smart Cities 2022, 5, 1129–1150. https://doi.org/10.3390/smartcities5030057

https://www.mdpi.com/journal/smartcities

Smart Cities 2022, 5

1130

lives—from the moment we wake up and check our phones, to when we are listening to
our smart speakers or surfing the Internet—our personal data is being constantly captured
by Big Tech corporations in a hyperconnected data economy [9].
Data privacy nowadays is a triggering issue. Reports focused on privacy issues and
digital rights have become numerous in popular media. Indeed, there is an exponentially
increasing number of online users on the Internet. In particular, more and more online
events like remote working and online classes have become more widespread during
COVID-19. However, more online events mean more personal data that one is required to
share, which calls for a system that can soundly protect personal information. Citizens are
facing the simultaneous need to maintain privacy and reveal personal information for the
purpose of obtaining diverse services [10]. Under the conditions of the digital economy, data
privacy thus has already become a global concern, and probably a geopolitical battleground
in terms of data and digital sovereignty [6].
Against this backdrop, there are the regional typologies in data governance worldwide:
(i) the GDPR in the E.U. [11], (ii) the California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA) in California
in the U.S. [12], and (iii) the recent data regulation called the Personal Information Protection
Law (PIPL) in China [13]. The latter seems to emulate the goals of the so-called GDPR, and
being effective from 1 November 2021. Furthermore, data sovereignty will prevail in an
increasing number of policy debates and discussions around the globe including E.U., U.S.,
and China, thus sparking an insightful diversity of reactions [6]. It goes without saying that
the so-called Social Credit System (SCS) in China may also be deeply influenced by this new
regulation insofar as data privacy is at the core of this main regulation [14,15]. Reijers et al.
define the citizenship regime associated with SCS in China as cybernetic citizenship arguing
that “SCS shapes the space, time, and interactions among peer citizens, and these are
turned into communicating nodes that are put into a systemic relation with defined ends of
their political community” (p. 8). Privacy needs stemming from PIPL cannot be explained
without the deep influence that SCS—even beyond technical interpretations—has been
imposing over citizens and the emerging citizenship regime called cybernetic citizenship
that has been exacerbated in postpandemic China. This article takes a technopolitical
position to analyse data privacy from a global perspective rather than from a particular
technical perspective or with an eye for the practical implications of data privacy [16]. In
doing so, this article adopts a comparative policy approach. As such, comparing three
global paradigms is presented as a macropolicy analysis that is far from a pure technical
perspective. Moreover, given the scope of the policy analysis suggested, technical cases
should be made case by case, while taking into account the point of departure that this
article elucidates. Failing to do so might potentially disable comparative global academic
observations by taking an extremely partial focus and not focusing on context-specific
dimensions, such as SCS and cybernetic citizenship.
The globally widespread phenomenon of algorithmic disruption has led to new
consequences—such as hypertargeting through data analytics, facial recognition, and
individual profiling—perceived by many as threats and resulting in undesirable outcomes,
such as massive manipulation and control via a surveillance capitalism push in the United
States (U.S.) and the SCS in China [5,14]. In contrast, these technopolitical concerns raised
a debate in Europe that crystallized into the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR),
which came into being in May 2018. The emergence of the algorithmic disruption has
spurred a call to action for cities in the European Union (E.U.), establishing the need to map
out the technopolitical debate on “datafication” or “dataism” [2]. Moreover, the disruption
has also highlighted the potential requirements for establishing regulatory frameworks to
protect digital rights from social innovation and institutional innovation [17]. Such policy
experimentation frameworks for urban governance cover not only demands for privacy,
but also ownership, trust, access, ethics, AI transparency, algorithmic automatization, and,
ultimately, democratic accountability [18].
With a particular focus on China that dates back to the 1980s, we see that along with
China’s reforms and its opening to a new version of urban capitalism [19], some researchers

Smart Cities 2022, 5

1131

have started to consider the definition of privacy in China as a general idea [20]. Although
experts oversaw the legal protection of privacy based on China’s existing situations, their
work remained out of public view for years. In China, personal information was often
leaked, leading to identity theft. In fact, there are a lot of laws, such as the Consumer
Protection Law and the Cybersecurity Law, which contain content related to personal
information protection [21]. But these laws are hard to implement, owing to ineffective law
enforcement and little public attention.
In recent years, with the rapid development of Internet of things (IoT) and mobile
payments and especially online shopping on sites like Taobao and JD in China, many consumers are willing to offer their personal information to purchase items on these platforms,
given the ability to shop 24/7 and the trust that exists between buyers and sellers [22]. Only
when brands offer more information proactively and guarantee consumers’ information
protection will the consumers build up a sense of trust. As online consumers, Chinese
citizens began to defend their interests by using the power of the Internet [23]. In this
scenario, the issues of data privacy are highly considered because it is much easier to sell
the personal information of customers. In addition, current big data discrimination issues
are widely considered; this refers to intelligent algorithms that decide price in a biased
manner based on big data analytics [24]. For instance, such unfair algorithms can learn the
potential customers who perhaps buy cars frequently by using big data analysis and offer
them at higher prices to buyers because of the built trust.
In particular (and this is the focus of this article), during the COVID-19 pandemic,
too many facial recognition platforms and other forms of information collection further
led to higher demands for protection of personal information [25]. A variety of social
issues regarding technological development urged the Chinese government to establish
and launch PIPL. PIPL, the recent data privacy regulation, basically focuses on personal
information protection and social problems that concern citizens [26]. PIPL regulates data
privacy based on individual and data-handler perspectives. Moreover, the government
constricts data transmission and algorithmic requirements that risk personal information
leakage.
Before the publication of PIPL, GDPR and CCPA were the two regulations stressing
the right to personal data. GDPR is one of most comprehensive regulations on data
privacy worldwide. Compared with the GDPR and CCPA, PIPL has several similarities
with regard to data privacy issues, but it is much shorter and has less detailed content.
Additionally, PIPL takes several innovative articles based on Chinese current conditions
into consideration, which was not the case for the previous two regulations.
Hence, this article aims to shed light on the recent PIPL regulation in China while
providing a benchmarking and comparative study about the existing three hegemonic
paradigms in the global digital order at present. This article opens a new research line on
comparative data privacy by examining the main three data privacy paradigms at present:
the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) in the E.U., the California Consumer
Privacy Act (CCPA) in the U.S., and PIPL in China. Consequently, the research question of
this article is twofold: (i) how will PIPL affect the data privacy of Chinese citizens and, more
broadly, (ii) how will PIPL influence the global digital order, particularly by paralleling the
existing GDPR and CCPA [27]?
This article focuses pre-eminently on a provision of PIPL’s state of the art through a
policy analysis by comparing the abovementioned three worldwide data privacy paradigms.
Hence, despite the existence of a rich and vast amount of technical literature on data privacy
(and in particular data protection), this article aims to open up a new research avenue from a
policy perspective, rather than providing practical applications from a technical perspective.
In order to respond to the research questions above, this technical perspective, though
necessary and extremely interesting, goes beyond the scope of this article. Nonetheless,
given that the main contribution of this article is framing the global digital policy context by
locating PIPL in the core of the analysis, this article invites further technical interpretations
and examinations about practical applications not only about PIPL but also about GDPR

Smart Cities 2022, 5

1132

and CCPA. Moreover, given the extremely timely launch of PIPL, it could be still too
nascent to conduct empirical research on technical differences when the global regulatory
frameworks are currently being deployed. In summary, this article should be understood
as a point of departure to initiate a new research avenue on data privacy regarding the
main digital policy paradigms.
The article is structured as follows. In the next section, a literature review on data
privacy and policy context analysis on China’s PIPL will be described, followed by a
comparative analysis of the three paradigms. The fourth section revolves around the case
of Shenzhen to provide insights on the way stakeholders are interpreting the aftermath
of PIPL. The article concludes by (i) answering the research questions, (ii) highlighting
some limitations about the scope of this article given the timely content, and (iii) suggesting
future research avenues.
2. Literature Review on Data Privacy and Policy Context Analysis on PIPL
This section provides an in-depth analysis of the policy context of PIPL in China. This
section shows how PIPL could be a game changer not only in the global digital order but
also internally with regard to SCS.
The SCS was launched by the Chinese Communist party in 2014 to give shape to civic
life in the urban realm, through city pilots and commercial platforms in cyberspace. This
article argues that SCS represents the introduction of cybernetic citizenship governance [15],
by systematizing a range of recursive feedback loops that harbor the potential to affect the
lives of citizens anywhere, at any time. During the pandemic, the SCS has been used to
adapt governance to impact the behavior of citizens [28]. The costs and benefits imposed
by the SCS are not of a monetary nature, but rather attach to one’s general standing as
a citizen, bestowing certain privileges and restrictions. With regard to data privacy, the
SCS has introduced a radically new form of citizenship governance, one that most likely
must still be proven in terms of effectiveness but which nonetheless is rigorously pursued
by the Chinese government. The literature review shows the value that the Chinese
government places on citizens’ data privacy, and this should ensure a proxy to consolidate
data sovereignty internally and externally [6,29–36]. Thus, PIPL and SCS might be seen as
mutually reinforcing a data governance model and data sovereignty.
Regarding data sovereignty, it is worth mentioning the key contribution made by
Yanqing, which reinforces the main idea of this article around data sovereignty, data privacy,
and cross-border data access. According to Yanqing [37], “China has chosen to uphold
the traditional concept of sovereignty in cross-border data access, based on the overall
international situation and the need to safeguard China’s overall sovereignty, security,
and development interests. ( . . . ) Can China strike a balance between old principles and
flexibility and smartly safeguard data sovereignty?” (p. 16). The more data flows China
attracts, the more control it can gain. Unlike physical territories, data inevitably flows across
borders. Thus, data sovereignty should be more than a government’s control over data
within its jurisdiction: it must enhance the capability to access, process, and utilize local
and extraterritorial data through flows and ecosystems [8]. To safeguard data sovereignty,
China should allow Chinese private firms to access and utilize more data globally, even
competing with the broad U.S. network of global firms. PIPL should be understood to be
entirely connected with the idea that the scope of data sovereignty should be extended.
While adhering to the traditional concept of sovereignty and multilateralism, in the digital
era, China, through PIPL, seems to establish a good data flow order for Chinese private
firms with globally integrated operations. Thus, PIPL is a critical component in the local
and extraterritorial design of China’s model of cross-border data access; consequently, SCS
serves to internally consolidate data feeds and flows.
Before conducting the literature review on data privacy, it is worth addressing several
points on the SCS [14,15]: (i) the SCS is preeminently a sociotechnical system that explicitly
targets citizenship by (ii) involving city pilots and smart city initiatives, agencies of regional
and national government, and Big Tech platforms [38–41]. Thus, this article establishes a

Smart Cities 2022, 5

1133

linkage between SCS and data privacy through the main, common idea that both are based
on professional ethics and behavioral norms. Data privacy, with an initial emphasis in
terms of rolling out commercial interests for consumption, shows—alongside SCS—that the
main motivation is covering all of society and thus establishing a new rationale behind the
nexus of data and citizenship [42–44]: a data governance framework driven by cybernetic
citizenship while being monitored through data sovereignty [6,14,15]. This article does
not attempt to cover this interesting dimension, but it encourages future research avenues
about it at the end of the article.
2.1. Literature Review on Data Privacy
Privacy is a concept containing a series of social situations, and thus general ideas
of privacy are quite intuitive considering the daily lives of citizens [9]. Many definitions
of privacy prefer to point out an important feature of privacy [45]. Data privacy is an
area of data protection, with particular attention paid to sensitive data, which is personal
information privacy [46]. Data privacy refers to the right to select what personal information
is known to different groups of people [47]. The definition points out the content of
information controls on individuals and their conversation and behaviors [48]. Privacy
in Chinese can be translated as yinsi, which means personal things that people are not
willing to tell one another or discuss in public [49]. Regulations nowadays usually look
for terms that have strong connections with data privacy like information protection. The
definitions vary based on the development of technology because advanced techniques
might have the risk of introducing new data privacy issues. In society nowadays, most
people hold some idea about the importance of data privacy, but it is difficult to provide
citizens with an exact definition of data privacy [50]. Therefore, regulations like GDPR and
CCPA propose norms on data privacy and illustrate the rights of companies and individuals
to set constraints on the issue rather than defining them. Such regulations that protect
individual fundamental rights can play an essential role in the construction of datafied
societies that aim to be known as “democratic” [51]. During the pandemic in China, there
is no doubt that providing some personal information like contact tracking could help
stop the spread of COVID-19 [52–54]. In such conditions, to tackle the surveillance issue
of concerned citizens, data privacy regulation could develop a consensus on how to use
personal data based on current issues.
Globally speaking, the questions regarding personal information date back to the
1970s, the period during which computer usage became widespread. When governments
and organizations coped with a large amount of data through large-scale computers, it was
hard for traditional legislation to handle issues pertaining to the illegal collection and use of
personal data [55]. Since then, personal data privacy has become highly regarded, and the
legislation on this subject keeps evolving in both the U.S. and the E.U. Coob [56] tracks the
development of data privacy legislation in the U.S. Starting with the Fair Credit Reporting
Act (FCRA) in 1970, which addressed the interest of individuals, the U.S. government
has enacted various data protection legislation, aiming to ensure that personal interests
in a wide range of situations can be protected. In the E.U., the Data Protection Directive
regulated the processing of personal data, until even more comprehensive regulation, the
GDPR, evolved toward the European Data Governance Act, which was framed through
the European Strategy for Data [57–61].
China has seen rapid growth regarding the Internet and IoT, despite the fact that the
Chinese GDP is still a quarter of the North American GDP. China’s embrace of capitalism
has allowed unprecedented growth due to the highly interregional competition between
civil servants’ leadership [19,53]. This resonates with the recent publications on the importance of city-regional data ecosystems [8,62]. The hypothesis of this present article, in
light of the recent PIPL regulation, is that the Chinese government is interested in data
privacy insofar as it can be arranged in sectoral data ecosystems at the city-regional level as
a way to deploy data devolution with city-regional civil servants competing for the best
data privacy program for their fellow citizens [33,63].

Smart Cities 2022, 5

1134

In the 1980s, the Township and Village Enterprises promoted by Deng Xiaoping
contributed to this growth. Citizens started to consider their individual interests due to
the developing economy. At that time, the awareness of the right to data privacy had
been discussed a great deal outside China, but only a few scholars began to develop this
area [20] within China. Since 2003, the Chinese government has worked on regulating
personal information protection in digital processes and formed a preliminary patchwork
of regulations, and such scattered regulations have been spread out among a variety of
laws [21]. However, the outcome of the implementation was not obvious because the
Internet was not universal. Over the course of the decade, with the rise of online shopping,
and especially due to the pandemic, citizens in China have been providing a large amount
of data when purchasing products. The Chinese government is aware that they should
overcome the 25% of the North American GDP if they need to become the most innovative
country worldwide. To achieve this, citizens’ data privacy needs to be highly considered as
a critical factor.
In conducting a literature review on data privacy, this article found several remarkable
sources in China. According to authors such as Yao-Huai, data privacy development in
China was shifting due to the influence of Western values [49]. Jingchun also demonstrates
historical data privacy in China compared with Western countries [20]. These sources
suggested that the discussions on data privacy were once popular at the beginning of the
21st century. However, a comprehensive development of the literature on the privacy issue
is absent and scarce from the policy perspective.
By contrast, there is a rich and remarkable literature from the technical perspective that
provides practical interpretations [64–72]. Peng et al. interestingly elaborate on the need to
design a privacy-preserving, contact-tracing framework by proposing P2B-Trace based on
blockchain [64]. Blockchain has gained its momentum in the postpandemic technopolitical
era, and key literature has already addressed the idea of crypto-politics with regard to
encryption and democratic practices in the digital era [65]. As such, it is worth going back
in history to trace the origin of such cutting-edge technical developments that are at the
origin of blockchain. Timothy May [66] argued in 1988 by launching The Crypto Anarchist
Manifesto that “Computer technology is on the verge of providing the ability for individuals
and groups to communicate and interact with each other in a totally anonymous manner.
Two persons may exchange messages, conduct business, and negotiate electronic contracts
without ever knowing the True Name, or legal identity, of the other. Interactions over
networks will be untraceable . . . . These developments will alter completely the nature of
government regulation, the ability to tax and control economic interactions, the ability to
keep information secret, and will even alter the nature of trust and reputation.”
Despite the fact that there is a long discussion about how to protect data privacy from
the technical perspective, this article does to aim to cover this scope. Nonetheless, Chen
and Zhao [67] present an analysis on data security and privacy protection issues associated
with cloud computing across all stages of the data life cycle. Peng et al. [68] overcome the
data-sharing, server-centric approach by suggesting BlockShare as a privacy-preserving,
verifiable data-sharing system based on blockchain. Tavani and Moor [69] controversially
suggest an interesting standpoint around privacy from the technical perspective. According
to them, privacy-enhancing technology (PET) tools do not necessarily ensure privacy
protection; instead, these tools can actually blur the need for privacy protection. In order
to avoid such technical issues, Gao et al. [70] suggest reducing the transmission cost of
blockchain confidential transactions through the novel communications of an efficient, noninteractive, zero-knowledge, range proof protocol that does not have a trusted setup called
SymmeProof. This protocol is based on blockchain cryptocurrencies to avoid tampering
attempts from minority attackers by maintaining a copy of all transactions at distributed
participants. Wang et al. suggests a survey with results on the privacy protection of
blockchain [71]. Interestingly, these authors provide several existing solutions to the current
problems of user identity and transaction privacy protection, including the coin-mixing
mechanism, zero-knowledge proof, ring signature, and other technologies. Finally, Peng

Smart Cities 2022, 5

1135

et al. [72] suggest BU-Trace, a novel permissionless mobile system for privacy-preserving
intelligent contact tracing based on QR codes and NFC technologies. These authors found
that BU-Trace can achieve a privacy-preserving and intelligent mobile system for contact
tracing without requesting geo-location or other privacy-related permissions.
More recently though, the Stanford Decentralized Autonomous Organizations (DAO)
Workshop that took place on 1 September 2022 at the University of Stanford showed new
developments regarding data privacy, blockchain, and DAOs [73]. The author of this
article has been selected to be among the group of participants and contributed to the
main conclusions of the workshop in Palo Alto, California (U.S.). Consequently, among
the outcomes of the workshop, there are several practical implications about data privacy
worth noting in this article. There are emerging applications around privacy protection that
are increasingly related to DAOs. As such, depending on the specific global scenarios we
are referring to, data privacy levels could vary and thus could be personalized differently
to satisfy different demands. Stemming from the workshop conclusions, this article argues
that user privacy protection schemes are reliant on the specific data privacy global paradigm.
Generalizations about how to tailor users’ privacy protection schemes will result in a rather
difficult task. This analysis and conclusion are based on discussions with global experts on
blockchain and DAOs regarding data privacy. What is also true is that data diversity and
dynamics should be considered when conducting privacy protection initiatives. At present,
there is an exponential emergence of data privacy protection around the three different
data privacy regulations worldwide that this article aims to cover.
To back up this analysis regarding the technical perspective on data privacy, it is
worth considering the article published by Rennie et al. [74]. According to them, data
privacy and blockchain governance occur through a combination of social and technical
activities, involving smart contracts, deliberation within a group, and voting. In their
article, SourceCred open-source software is used through decentralized communities to
allow data privacy and anonymous interactions. This ethnographic research suggests the
importance of merging and blending technopolitical, social, and pure technical perspectives
on data privacy and blockchain governance. Furthermore, the more applications about data
privacy protection are emerging, the more obvious seems to be the fact that the technical
perspective needs to include a macro-technopolitical perspective about global regulations
as well as the context-specific social and community-driven factors.
Consequently, beyond the scope of this article, there is a remarkable amount of technical literature on data privacy. Nevertheless, being consistent with the research question
of this article, the focus of this article is a policy analysis rather than a technical, nuanced
examination of data and its privacy. The article preeminently aims to provide a point
of departure for further nuanced detailed research on this topic. Therefore, it would be
extremely ambitious to cover more perspectives. Having said that, the research question
in itself invites future research technical initiatives, examinations, and developments that
could contribute to the preliminary framework of this article in responding in two directions: (i) how PIPL will be affecting the data privacy of Chinese citizens, paying special
attention to the SCS, which is indeed the emphasis of this article; and (ii) how PIPL is
already influencing the global digital order, paralleling the existing GDPR and CCPA.
This article asks, therefore, why data privacy has jumped onto the policy table in China.
In order to learn why, the literature review of this article has found a great number or
reports and news recently emerging, which began to pay more attention to the citizens’ data
privacy issue, especially at the governmental level beyond the purely technical perspective.
Consequently, the next subsection focuses on the policy content analysis of these sources.
2.2. Policy Content Analysis on China’s Data Privacy Regulation, PIPL
PIPL is a milestone for regulating the protection of personal information specifically,
which will guarantee the right of individuals and place constraints on enterprises. Together
with the Cybersecurity Law (CSL) and Data Security Law (DSL) that were established
previously [28], PIPL constructs a comprehensive framework for regulating information

Smart Cities 2022, 5

1136

protection and cybersecurity [75]. In this subsection, this article basically refers to the
translation of the finalized PIPL provided by Stanford Digichina [76] and an official finalized
version can be found on Chinese websites [77]. Generally, the policy analysis is divided
into three parts: (i) a general description and explanations of key terms, (ii) rights and
obligations from a multi-stakeholder perspective [78], and (iii) special regulations connected
to social issues.
2.2.1. General Description
Within PIPL, personal data privacy is the main focus of regulation. The regulation
first clearly defines several terms that apply frequently. First, the key term, personal
information, is regarded as all kinds of information related to identified or identifiable
persons, excluding the information after anonymization processing (Article 4). Personal
information in PIPL stresses the electronic approach to record data, implying that there is a
large amount of online data that needs to be regulated. Additionally, personal information
handling includes all basic operations on personal data such as collection, storage, use,
and processing (Article 4). In addition, PIPL sets a standard norm for most enterprises on
personal information protection. Thus, it is essential to clarify the definition of enterprises or
companies. Such roles are so-called personal information handlers, indicating organizations
and individuals that decide handling purposes and handling methods automatically in
personal information activities (Article 73). Under this description, PIPL can be effective in
most enterprises because it places a lot of constraints on such handlers. To illustrate more
specifically, we will apply Shenzhen as a case study. The selection of Shenzhen is due to the
many high-tech companies that are based in this city; this provides an insightful manner
by which to approach to the impact of PIPL on city-regional stakeholders [78].
2.2.2. Right and Obligation from a Multi-Stakeholder Perspective
After demonstrating well-defined terms, we need to figure out what rights that citizens or individuals have and what obligations that handlers should take. In Chapter 4,
individuals are enabled to make decisions about and limit their own personal information;
they have the right to know how data handlers process private information (Article 44,
47). In particular, the range of individuals is expanded to include deceased individuals
(Article 49).
As for handlers, PIPL sets multiple constraints on them in Chapter 5, which mainly
requires data compliance and internal management. In Article 51, handlers are required to
take measurements of personal information with secure techniques and to raise employee’s
awareness by security education training. For special personal data such as sensitive data,
evaluation of such data is needed for checking the impact of protection (Article 55, 56). In
particular, for those larger handlers such as Big Tech companies like Alibaba, which hold
large amounts of user data, protection systems should be established and supervised by
outsiders, and there is remarkable punishment for larger handlers who violate regulations
(Article 58). This suggests that the larger handlers should be more transparent in processing
personal data.
In addition, PIPL illustrates the responsibilities of departments that fulfill the protection of personal information as outlined in Chapter 6. Acting as supervisors, such
departments generally oversee the personal information handlers and cope with complaints from citizens (Article 61). Notably, PIPL points out the duties of state cybersecurity
and informatization departments, which includes tech support, security promotion, and
personal information system construction (Article 62). This article implies that the state
departments are required to establish more specific adjustments based on PIPL. From
Chapter 4 to Chapter 6, PIPL ensures the rights of citizens to have their private information
managed by handlers or enterprises with more obligations and constraints.

Smart Cities 2022, 5

1137

2.2.3. Special Regulations Connected with Social Issues
There are several articles that deserve to be pointed out, as they connect to issues in
Chinese society, particularly with regard to SCS. In Article 24, automated decision-making
is particularly mentioned as the price of various applications nowadays, which largely
depends on intelligent algorithms that extract information from big data [24,79–82]. With
this article, the process of decision making is required to be more transparent and eliminate
unreasonable treatment in trading. With the exception of decision making, PIPL also
addresses the issue of face recognition in Article 26 and Article 28 [83].
The surveillance system in China is already well developed [84]. In the construction
of smart cities, mass surveillance serves to measure, track, and analyze data from various
aspects of life including air quality and traffic congestion [85]. During the pandemic period
in particular, tools that tracked people who had contracted the virus resulted in slowing its
spread. However, Article 28 clarifies the nature of sensitive personal information, which
includes individual location tracking. Image collection and identity recognition equipment
are only acceptable under the purpose of maintaining public security (Article 26). It is a
tradeoff between personal privacy and digital measurement [86].
In the description of sensitive personal information, the personal information of
teenagers under 14 are included. Nowadays, an increasing number of adolescents are
addicted to online games [87], which means their personal information is exposed much
more easily and without any protections. Therefore, when PIPL handles sensitive personal
information in Chapter 2, this type of data is stressed in Article 28 and Article 30. It
implicitly suggests that the Chinese government highly considers the development of
adolescents.
From the general analysis of PIPL above, this article analyzed the policy regulation
with three main parts. It is essential to learn about citizens’ rights and the duties of
companies or enterprises. In addition to endowing citizens with basic rights, there are more
constraints on enterprises to set boundaries for managing private information. In addition,
for those articles that relate to current social issues, the Chinese government highlights
issues that citizens are urged to understand with regard to PIPL, because any behaviors in
violation could be recorded immediately in the Chinese SCS. This point might open new
lines of inquiry regarding the consequences of PIPL and the relation to the SCS and the
associated cybernetic citizenship emerging in postpandemic China [14,15]. This article does
not aim to focus on this relationship insofar as it aims to provide a state-of-the-art report
on PIPL from the policy perspective.
3. Method: Comparative Analysis of Data Privacy Regulations Worldwide
The debate that is at stake at present is about people-centered smart cities and the
appropriateness of data governance models in different regions worldwide [18,88]. There
are a wide range of factors related to different typologies of cities, cultural aspects, urban
traditions, levels of development, and political systems that provide a complex landscape
of smart city approaches [89,90]. However, all these factors are embedded in a real context,
making it difficult to extrapolate or generalize. Therefore, to reduce the complexity of each
regional typology (North American, European, and Chinese) could be problematic and pose
insurmountable hindrances with regard to making generalizations about data governance
models. How can the people-centered approach be a good lens by which to distinguish
regional typologies by respecting each region’s singularity and contextual factors? At
present, at least in the North American, Chinese, and European regional typologies, data
regulation, and governance models vary from each other and co-exist by influencing smart
city approaches, as it is depicted in Table 1 [1].

Smart Cities 2022, 5

1138

Table 1. Depicting three data privacy regulations in the global digital order: GDPR, CCPA, and PIPL.
Global Digital
Orders

European

North American
Chinese

Data Privacy Regulations
General Data Protection Regulation
(GDPR) [11]
Data Governance Act (DGA) [58–60]
Digital Markets Act (DMA)
Digital Services Act (DSA)
California Consumer Privacy Act
(CCPA) [12]
Personal Information Protection Law
(PIPL) [77]

Smart City Policy Approach

H2020-Smart Cities and
Communities [1]

Surveillance Capitalism [5]
SCS [14,15]

The GDPR in Europe is considered to be one of the strictest privacy laws; it was put
into effect in May 2018. Another law with significant meaning is CCPA in the U.S.; it
took effect in January 2020. The advent of these two privacy laws grabbed a huge amount
of attention from researchers and law experts [91]. With swift growth in new economic
sectors like the consumer and technology sectors, there is no doubt that the upcoming
implementation of PIPL in China takes a wide variety of factors into consideration and
compares with the previous two privacy laws.
While PIPL was launching in November 2021 [26], the European Commission published the Data Governance Act [60]. The latter sought to ensure fairness in the allocation
of value from data among actors in the data economy and sought to foster access to and the
use of data by establishing some access and sharing obligations for companies collecting
and generating data. Despite the ambitious goal of the Data Governance Act, it focuses on
data generated by IoT products and related services, but left out Big Tech, digital platforms,
and Telcos, which were arguably the largest producers and holders of data. Still, given
the importance of IoT for cities, the Data Governance Act might have important effects on
the creation of urban data markets and in city governments’ ability to access data to make
better policy choices. To complete this gap, and primarily to attempt to regulate Big Tech
companies, in December 2020 and on 25 March 2022, the European Commission launched,
respectively, two legislative initiatives to upgrade rules governing digital services in the
EU: the Digital Services Act (DSA) and the Digital Markets Act (DMA). Two main goals
were addressed: (i) to create a safer digital space in which the fundamental rights of all
users of digital services were protected, and (ii) to establish a level playing field to foster
innovation, growth, and competitiveness, both in the European single market and globally.
To develop the in-depth comparisons emphasizing similarities and differences among
PIPL, GDPR, and CCPA, this article basically refers to the content of these three privacy
laws and regulations [11,12,77], expanding several comparative perspectives based on
PIPL. Since PIPL was released, there have been many online reports making comparisons
between PIPL and GDPR. However, few papers and other online resources have made a
sound comparison between PIPL, GDPR, and CCPA. Therefore, by organizing the existing
online sources, primarily dividing comparisons between PIPL and GDPR and comparisons
between GDPR and CCPA, this article first analyzes these laws and regulations from the
perspective of four dimensions (Table 2): (i) coverage, (ii) key terms (enterprise duties,
personal information, and sensitive personal information), (iii) individual digital rights [17],
and (iv) restrictions on cross-border data handling. Thereafter, this article concludes with
the similarities and differences among them and an analysis of potential factors that affect
these differences, as shown in Table 2.

Smart Cities 2022, 5

1139

Table 2. Comparing three data privacy regulations through four dimensions.
4 DIMENSIONS

PIPL

GDPR

CCPA

1. COVERAGE
All entities within
All entities that
China’s border.
process personal data,
Apply to those who
All Californian
established in the EU.
process personal
residents living
Apply to those
information about
within California
non-EU entities that
Chinese individuals
federal state.
process personal data
outside China’s
inside the EU.
border. (Article 3)
2. KEY TERMS
Regards as personal
information handler,
referring to
Regards businesses
organizations and
that operate for profit
individuals
Regard as controllers
and decides why and
autonomously
who holds data with
1. Enterprise duties
how personal
deciding handling
authority of decision
information is
purposes and
making.
processed, located in
handling methods
California.
under the activities of
personal information
handling. (Article 73)
All kinds of
information, recorded
Information that
by any means, related Any information
identifies directly or
to identified or
relating to identified
2. Personal
indirectly with a
identifiable natural
or identifiable natural
information
consumer or
persons. Anonymous citizen.
household.
information is
excluded. (Article 4)
Includes biometric
Regards special
characteristics,
category information,
Does not mention the
religious beliefs,
including racial or
related term explicitly
specially designated
ethnic origin, political
but enhances several
3. Sensitive personal status, medical health, opinion, religious
types of data such as
financial accounts,
beliefs, trade union
information
health information
individual location
membership, genetic
and social security
tracking and personal or biometric data,
number.
information under the health data, sex life or
age of 14. (Article 28)
sexual orientation.
3. INDIVIDUAL DIGITAL RIGHTS
Data portability is
allowed if CAC
Data portability is
The right to equal
conditions are
allowed.
services and prices.
satisfied.
4. RESTRICTIONS ON CROSS-BORDER DATA HANDLING
“Appropriate
Pass security
safeguards”: binding
assessment, obtain
corporate rules
authoritative
(BCRs), standard
No restrictions.
certification, or make
contractual clauses
standard recipient
(SCCs) and a conduct
contract.
code.

Smart Cities 2022, 5

1140

3.1. Dimension 1: Coverage
The territorial scope, basically demonstrated as citizens, points out the kinds of person
and behaviors that are applicable to laws. This analysis can observe that the scope of
PIPL and GDPR is similar and is not limited inside the borders of their respective regions.
However, the applicable range for CCPA is relatively narrow because it is used only for
California.
3.2. Dimension 2: Key Terms (Enterprise Duties, Personal Information, and Sensitive
Personal Information)
As for the key terms, all definitions of enterprises stress the entities that process
personal information. However, whereas the GDPR, reinforced with DGA, DSA, and
DMA, attempts to regulate Big Tech companies in the EU, PIPL seems relatively more
concerned with gathering data from businesses for the government in order to potentially
feed and improve SCS. Lastly, CCPA seems to address consumer transactions. Personal
information emphasizes the words “identifiable” or “identified”. Apart from personal
information, there is a specific category called sensitive personal information in PIPL,
Chapter 2, Section 2, whereas GDPR regards it as special category information. Both PIPL
and GDPR list several kinds of information such as categories with extra protection and
more tough regulations. Though CCPA does not mention such data types clearly, it does
augment the several types of data needed to be highly considered. Compared with GDPR
and CCPA, sensitive personal information in PIPL is described with more granularity and
is framed in a broader list.
3.3. Dimension 3: Individual Digital Rights
Individual rights are another critical dimension by which we can measure the three
data privacy laws. Basically, these three laws endow individuals with rights to information,
accession, deletion, withdrawing consent, and lodging complaints. In PIPL and GDPR,
individuals have the right to refuse automated decision-making, which is akin to the right
to equal services and prices in CCPA. Unlike CCPA, both PIPL and GDPR also enable
individuals with rights to data portability. But it only works in PIPL if conditions followed
by the Cyberspace Administration of China (CAC) are satisfied.
3.4. Dimension 4: Restrictions on Cross-Border Data Handling
Between PIPL and GDPR, restrictions on cross-border data handling are clarified,
whereas CCPA has no such restrictions [37,41]. With regard to globalization, adjusting crossborder data is of great issue in the digital era. The term “trilemma” is proposed, containing
three components: personal data protection, free transborder flow of information, and
the expansion of national jurisdiction [92]. What both GDPR and PIPL attempt to achieve
is the assurance of personal data protection, one of the elements in the “trilemma”. To
transfer data outside a defined border, both regulations build up several measurement
protections. In the GDPR, binding corporate rules (BCRs), standard contractual clauses
(SCCs) and a conduct code are listed, which are regarded as “appropriate safeguards” [93].
Concerning PIPL, personal data handlers are required to pass a security assessment, obtain
authoritative certification, or make standard recipient contracts (Article 38). Moreover,
PIPL particularly stresses data localization once there is a large amount of data that needs
to be dealt with [36,94]. Apparently, GDPR has a list of measurements on data protection,
which is sound and robust. Surprisingly, the security assessment in PIPL has grabbed a
lot of attention. It is possible that a security assessment can set tougher rules on specific
regulations in the future. Additionally, data localization in PIPL ensures the security of
citizens’ data and prevents data privacy and data sovereignty from being breached by
foreign surveillance [6,29].
Based on comparisons of the four dimensions above, we can see that from the perspective of coverage, it is obvious that fewer individuals benefit from CCPA because it
only affects residents in one state. On the contrary, PIPL and GDPR hold the nearly same

Smart Cities 2022, 5

1141

idea that not only do the regulations consider the entities from the inside, but they also
consider entities from the outside. Such coverage suggests that both governments have
capabilities to manage such a considerable number of citizens’ data in both a technological
and practical way. As for the key definitions, CCPA is only suitable for large businesses
in California whereas PIPL and GDPR contain almost all enterprises that handle personal
information within their respective boundaries. In addition, all explanations of personal
information emphasize the word “identified”. Specifically, personal information has a
broader definition in CCPA including the household. Regarding sensitive information,
both PIPL and GDPR define it as a special field of personal information and mention it
with details whereas CCPA only enhances several kinds of sensitive information among its
regulations. In PIPL, Chapter 2, Section 2 [77], all kinds of sensitive information are listed.
Similarly, a special category information in GDPR is demonstrated. PIPL covers more
diverse sensitive information compared with GDPR. Because of technological development
and advancement algorithms, a large amount of information may cause risks to individuals
and thus are clarified as sensitive information.
In summary, even though PIPL is an innovative law in China, it is still a general
concept, which needs to be specified by citizens from different aspects, including data
privacy technical advancements. On the other hand, GDPR publishes more concrete ideas
on personal information protection and updated regulations such as DGA, DSA, and DMA.
By observing different reactions from different perspectives, the adjusted regulations are
necessary. For instance, the DGA was proposed recently to address the gap that small- and
medium-scale companies are reluctant to share data because of the fear of breaking privacy
laws in the E.U. [95]. Therefore, PIPL should be considerate to the further adaptation on
the different stakeholders as the next section will highlight with the case of Shenzhen.
4. Case Study Results: PIPL Policy Impact and Multi-Stakeholder Analysis in the
City-Region of Shenzhen
This section analyzes the policy context of the PIPL in China by providing examples
of stakeholders based in Shenzhen. This section illustrates the impact of PIPL through
this case study. The justification of the selection of Shenzhen is explained as follows:
Shenzhen has been selected and identified as a city-region in China concentrating many
high-tech companies and having witnessed a rapid urbanization process over the last
decade. However, a caveat should be made. The inclusion of the case study of Shenzhen
does not aim to legitimize any extrapolation or generalization in this article. Consequently,
the aim of this section is to describe a paradigmatic urban area in China in the early
adoption of the recent PIPL regulation.
Shenzhen, located in southern China in the Pearl River Delta Region, was a small
village before establishing the Special Economic Zone in 1980 [96]. For forty years, Shenzhen, as an experimental city, has gone through rapid urbanization. Shenzhen’s GDP
exponentially increased, achieving the total amount of 2.77 trillion yuan in 2020 [97]. Many
people are attracted by its promising development. Moreover, thanks to the ideal location
of Shenzhen, being near to Hong Kong and Macao, the Outline Development Plan for
the Guangdong–Hong Kong–Macao Greater Bay Area [98], established in February 2019,
points out that Shenzhen nowadays plays a critical role in the construction of the international modern city. Basically, the rapid growth of the economy in Shenzhen is portrayed by
shipping and logistics, high-tech industry, and financial services [19,99]. It is worth noting
that many headquarters of high-tech companies are located in this young city, including
Tencent [100], Huawei [101], DJI [102], OnePlus [103], and SF Express [104]. For such
high-tech companies, there is no doubt that they hold a large amount of personal data for
developing their services. Hence, the upcoming PIPL might have a remarkable impact on
the burgeoning digital city-region, especially on those high-tech enterprises.
Several months before the launch of PIPL on 1 November 2021, Shenzhen, the leading
financial and production center for China and home of many Chinese Internet and tech
giants such as Huawei and Tencent, enacted its regional data protection law entitled Data

Smart Cities 2022, 5

1142

Regulation of the Shenzhen Special Economic Zone (also known as Shenzhen Data Regulation) on
29 June 2021. Shenzhen Data Regulation became effective on 1 January 2022.
To specify how PIPL might be currently affecting the Shenzhen city-region, this article
basically considers the multi-stakeholder ecosystem in this city-region by using the Penta
Helix framework (Figure 1) [38,39,78]. Extending from the triple and quadruple-helix,
Penta Helix appends a fifth helix that plays a transformational intermediary role, which
refers to social entrepreneurs or activists [39]. Because of the technopolitical awareness and
ownership of data itself, Shenzhen, abundant with high-tech companies, should emphasize
the active role of citizenship and the connection about different sectors [7]. Followed by the
Penta Helix framework, several stakeholders are described inside the model, consisting
of the public sector, the private sector, academia, civic society, and social entrepreneurs.
Therefore, in the following analysis, this article describes various stakeholders’ attitude
towards PIPL and how PIPL might affect them based on current context in Shenzhen. This
analysis has been undertaken by identifying key stakeholders from the policy analysis and
the literature review on PIPL with a special consideration of the case of Shenzhen. This
preliminary analysis encourages further and more in-depth research in this direction.

Figure 1. Penta Helix multi-stakeholder framework [1,38,39,78].

4.1. Private Sector
Shenzhen data regulations have the same set of rules for data processing as mentioned
in PIPL. Violation of the personal data protection and data security rules could attract fines
of up to 5% of turnover but no more than CNY 50 million. Like PIPL, for the private sector,
Shenzhen data regulations restrict discriminatory treatment to customers by using data
profiling. Shenzhen data regulations provide a five data minimization test that requires
that personal data shall have a direct relation with the processing purpose, that the amount
and frequency of data processing shall be kept to a minimum, that the time of personal
data storage shall be the minimum, and that only the authorized person shall be allowed to
access the minimum amount of personal data.
Companies in Shenzhen are (i) redesigning information systems to localize data for
the Chinese internal market, (ii) assessing and segmenting vendors and supply chains to
mitigate risks, (iii) reevaluating deals in light of altered costs and returns on investment,

Smart Cities 2022, 5

1143

and (iv) modifying legal-entity structures and tax strategies to adapt to altered business
operations.
It is unavoidable that private companies will manage a variety of personal informationbased data and use it to unearth potential customers. Thus, PIPL might be a good regulation
by which to protect citizens’ data among those companies. Many private companies in
Shenzhen, especially the large companies, are highly concerned about the new constraints
on data because they might have a huge punishment because of the establishment of PIPL.
Amazon was punished last year for breaking GDPR rules with an $886.6 million fine [105].
In China, PIPL basically holds a similar idea as GDPR, by increasing the regulatory scrutiny
of data handlers. Moreover, in Shenzhen, cybersecurity inspections are initialized on
popular applications such as DIDI for rideshare and BOSS for job recruitment [106]. Hence,
for companies in Shenzhen, it has become necessary to adopt new regulations to protect
citizens’ information.
Judging from the information available in the policy documents and the literature
review on specific cases in Shenzhen [107], companies generally seem to hold a positive
attitude toward PIPL. In particular, those high-tech companies are willing to employ advanced technologies and algorithms to ensure privacy security. For smartphone companies
like Huawei and OPPO, this means making secure measurements of issue of users’ privacy.
A new operating system, Harmony OS, has been invented by Huawei, passing the highest
security certification in China. The new system ensures the safety of data storage, transmission, and usage. Similarly, OPPO owns their system known as Color OS. In this system,
they propose a new function to hide the users’ identity, preventing the theft of personal
information from applications [107]. As an online services provider, Tencent is a company
owning widely used social media outlets such as WeChat. It also realizes the importance of
privacy, applying various security techniques and training for employees [108].
Although the private sectors have provided a sound plan for customers by ensuring
their personal information privacy, PIPL is conducive to construct a healthier system among
personal data protection. As PIPL shows, data handlers need to adopt technical security
measures, security education, and training, incident-response plans, and informationprotection impact assessment (Article 51, 55 in PIPL). Notably, large data handlers such
as Tencent and Huawei are required to be supervised by outsiders, which is the main
modification made by PIPL. More importantly, because these private companies are located
in the Greater Bay Area, PIPL can conduct more strict regulation on cross-border transfer
data. According to Liang Zhenying [109], the vice chairman of the National Committee of
the Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference, China could be the pilot program
of international multilateral rules through cross-border data governance in the Greater Bay
Area. Undoubtedly, this represents a significant opportunity for Shenzhen to reinforce its
existing technopolitical and geopolitical position.
4.2. Public Sector
The local government in Shenzhen might be optimistic about PIPL. One piece of
explicit evidence is that Shenzhen local authorities had established Shenzhen special
economic zone data regulations in response to the previous data security law (DSL) [110].
As an experimental city, Shenzhen specifies that the national law clearly prohibits the
illegal recommendation of algorithms and data discrimination, which plays a critical
role in supervising private companies. Moreover, to achieve the goal of data commons,
departments in government that hold rich resources of public data must be willing to share
them with citizens [7,111]. The open-source data have been encouraged and utilized by
setting up the Shenzhen innovative competition since 2019 [112]. Considering the spread
of COVID-19, the Shenzhen government, like those of other cities in China, took the action
of immediately including a broad application of health codes [113]. This indicates that
the government in Shenzhen is capable of handling big issues in a timely manner. The
research conducted found that the government might publish tougher supervisions on

Smart Cities 2022, 5

1144

large companies, technical and managerial guidance on small companies, and data security
education on local residents [114].
More recently, the Shenzhen city administration has started mobilizing all resources to
curb a slowly spreading COVID-19 outbreak, ordering a strict implementation of testing
and temperature checks, and lockdowns for COVID-affected buildings. The city has gone
into full weekend lockdown with the bus and subway services being suspended, and
other restrictions put into effect. This situation might reinforce the local authorities in
sharing data with citizens while being compliant with PIPL and Shenzhen data regulations
on privacy issues. However, as previously demonstrated during the pandemic, tough
lockdown regulations go hand in hand with data privacy concerns given the increasing
peak in data flows during isolation. Local authorities may take this recent situation to
implement both PIPL and Shenzhen data regulations.
4.3. Academia
A handful of higher education institutions are located in Shenzhen, including Shenzhen University [115], the Chinese University of Hong Kong (CUHKSZ) [116], and the
Southern University of Science and Technology [117]. All these universities make a great
contribution to the research of specific fields of science. Specifically, CUHKSZ positively impacts the fields of computer and information science, big data, and data science respectively.
In addition, Shenzhen University establishes regulation on data security protection, including the records of sensitive information, such as students’ grades and faculties’ salaries.
The universities are eager to construct a public data storage system [118]. Therefore, with
the establishment of PIPL, the universities are more willing to do relevant research on data
privacy fields as the exploration of pertinent knowledge, especially new algorithms, might
be applied in a practical way.
However, as Grobe–Bley and Kostka found [114], digital systems in Shenzhen entail
a creeping centralization of data that potentially turns lower administrative government
units into mere users of the city-level smart platforms, rather than being in control of
their own data resources. Smart city development and big data ambitions thereby imply
shifting stakeholder relations at the local level and also pull non-governmental stakeholders,
such as civil society and social entrepreneurs/activists, closer to new data flows and
smart governance systems. This bridging task could be reliant on key higher education
institutions, in the context of PIPL and Shenzhen data regulation implementations.
4.4. Civil Society
Citizens nowadays have awareness of the privacy issue and are sensitive about r
news related to this topic. For instance, an influential social media company, WeChat,
recently exposed a privacy leakage issue in which the company software read users’ albums
automatically, drawing a great deal of attention from citizens due to its popularity [119].
Even though the official response was claimed immediately, many online users presented
their concerns about the exposure of their personal information. Hence, PIPL attempts to
guarantee the basic rights of citizens, including rights to information, access, correction,
erasure, and so on (PIPL Chapter 4). Under such conditions, citizens in Shenzhen might
benefit from the new regulations because PIPL offers additional individual rights for
citizens.
The key guiding principles underpinning Shenzhen’s 2018 Smart City Plan are data
unification and integration. However, Shenzhen’s smart governance model is highly
centralized for data collection, management, and application, which may result in clear
difficulties when engaging with communities and citizens. In this sense, as stated in
Section 2.1. it could be interesting to explore blockchain-driven implementations, including
citizens and communities by using DAOs. PIPL and Shenzhen data regulations could
provide an interesting future framework by which to leverage data sovereignty. It goes
without saying that the significant existing gap between big data ambitions and local

Smart Cities 2022, 5

1145

realities in Shenzhen due to major technopolitical hurdles embedded in local data practices,
are likely to pose potential future difficulties until they are gradually amended.
4.5. Social Entrepreneurs/Activists
Basically, there is evidence of this type of stakeholder in the fifth helix, referring to
the social entrepreneurs in Shenzhen [120]. Regarding the huge damage caused by the
pandemic, social entrepreneurs offer a positive response to the disaster. For example, as a
social enterprise, Shenzhen link accessibility increased information accessibility for visually
impaired persons during the outbreak of COVID-19 [52,121]. It may seem then that PIPL
could leverage the potential of social entrepreneurs by transforming communities. The
recent lockdown in early September 2022 will demonstrate the quality of the entrepreneurial
fabric of the city. During the pandemic, a communitarian fabric of assistance was established
to sort out these kinds of issues.
Therefore, generally speaking, PIPL can bring a positive influence on multi-stakeholders
in Shenzhen. Although it is hard to adapt PIPL at the beginning especially for the private
companies [53], it can bring us a relatively favorable direction on personal data protection.
5. Conclusions
This article posed a research question in two parts: (i) how will PIPL affect the data
privacy of Chinese citizens, and broadly, consequently, (ii) how will PIPL influence the
global digital order, particularly by paralleling the existing GDPR and CCPA?
In response to these research questions, the article has broadly described the recent
PIPL regulation comparatively amid the GDPR and the CCPA.
First, despite being too early for an in-depth judgement and examination of the
implications for Chinese citizens, PIPL will clearly benefit the control of data by the Chinese
government and will allow for a relevant gateway for international multilateral rules
through cross-border data governance [37], particularly as seen in the case of Shenzhen,
given its privileged technopolitical and geostrategic localization. The aim of the article was
to provide a state-of-the-art review of PIPL considering the current development in the
field of data privacy. More prospectively though and with a vision for future work, we can
state that this new regulation will clearly help to feed SCS and to improve it. In addition,
as formulated in Section 2.1., the Chinese government aims to establish sectoral data
ecosystems at the city-regional level to deploy data devolution [33]. It goes without saying
that PIPL aims to rein in the previously unchecked growth of its tech giants, including the
WeChat operator Tencent, and ByteDance, the company behind TikTok and Douyin. PIPL
is focusing on protecting individuals, society, and particularly national security. As such,
if the GDPR is grounded in fundamental rights and the CCPA is grounded in consumer
protection, PIPL is closely aligned with national security. Hence, PIPL is clearly affecting
data privacy of citizens and related stakeholders as this article has shown with the case of
Shenzhen.
Secondly, PIPL suggests a step forward toward data sovereignty in China. The consequences of such regulation in the international digital order remain to be seen. What is
clear is that PIPL, the GDPR, and the CCPA are already influencing digital policies and
practices worldwide. Whereas PIPL is likely to encourage Chinese domestic companies to
improve how they handle data, it will also have an impact on broader data rules worldwide.
Actually, countries in Asia, namely India and Vietnam, may follow the Chinese approach
of having those data localization measures in their privacy laws.
This article acknowledges some limitations given the recent regulation and the lack
of evidence from the stakeholders in the case of Shenzhen. Thus, future research avenues
could explore in depth how stakeholders are coping with PIPL through interviews and
discuss which data governance models are emerging out of this regulation. The vision of
the future work could be deployed as follows. Given the direct influence of PIPL alongside
the GDPR and the CCPA in the global digital order, this article could articulate the vision
of the future work around data privacy in relation to the increasingly vast activity around

Smart Cities 2022, 5

1146

DAOs as presented in Section 2.1. During the Stanford DAO Workshop [73], the author
of this article could witness the influence that these new digital architectures, driven by
blockchain and framed through crypto-politics, will present for data privacy regulations
and, generally speaking, for cross-border data flows among citizens. This article aimed at
providing a preliminary state-of-the-art review to initiate this new line of research inquiry
on data privacy, potentially being the point of departure for further data developments
around emerging research fields including blockchain and DAOs.
Funding: This research was funded by Fulbright Scholar-In-Residence (S-I-R) Award 2022-23, Grant
Number PS00334379 by US-UK Fulbright Commission and IIE, U.S. Department of State in California
State University, Bakersfield and by the Economic and Social Research Council (ESRC), Grant Number
ES/S012435/1 WISERD Civil Society: Changing Perspectives on Civic Stratification and Civil Repair.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Conflicts of Interest: The author declares no conflict of interest.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.

Calzada, I. Smart City Citizenship; Elsevier Science Publishing Co Inc.: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2021. [CrossRef]
Sadowski, J.; Viljoen, S.; Whittaker, M. Everyone should decide how their digital data are used—not just tech companies. Nature
2021, 595, 169–171. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Breuer, J.; Pierson, J. The right to the city and data protection for developing citizen-centric digital cities. Inf. Commun. Soc. 2021,
24, 797–812. [CrossRef]
Löfgren, K.; Webster, C.W.R. The value of Big Data in government: The case of ‘smart cities’. Big Data Soc. 2020, 7,
2053951720912775. [CrossRef]
Zuboff, S. The Age of Surveillance Capitalism: The Fight for a Human Future at the New Frontier of Power; Profile: London, UK, 2019.
Calzada, I. Data Co-operatives through Data Sovereignty. Smart Cities 2021, 4, 1158–1172. Special Issue “Feature Papers for Smart
Cities”. [CrossRef]
Calzada, I. (Smart) citizens from data providers to decision-makers? The case study of Barcelona. Sustainability 2018, 10, 3252.
[CrossRef]
Calzada, I.; Almirall, E. Data ecosystems for protecting European citizens’ digital rights. Transform. Gov. People Process Policy 2020,
14, 133–147. [CrossRef]
Veliz, C. Privacy is Power: Why and How You Should Take Back Control of Your Data; Corgi: London, UK, 2020.
Pelteret, M.; Ophoff, J. A Review of Information Privacy and Its Importance to Consumers and Organizations. Inf. Sci. Int. J.
Emerg. Transdiscipl. 2016, 19, 277–301. [CrossRef]
GDPR (General Data Protection Regulation). Available online: www.gdpr-info.eu (accessed on 8 August 2021).
CCPA (California Consumer Privacy Act). CCPA and GDPR Comparison Chart. Available online: https://iapp.org/resources/
article/ccpa-and-gdpr-comparison-chart/ (accessed on 8 August 2021).
Gamvros, A.; Wang, L. PIPL: A Game Changer for Companies in China. Available online: https://www.dataprotectionreport.
com/2021/08/pipl-a-game-changer-for-companies-in-china/ (accessed on 29 August 2021).
Kostka, G.; Antoine, L. Fostering model citizenship: Behavioral responses to China’s emerging social credit systems. Policy
Internet 2020, 12, 256–289. [CrossRef]
Reijers, W.; Orgad, L.; De Filippi, P. The rise of cybernetic citizenship. Citizsh. Stud. 2022. [CrossRef]
Calzada, I. Emerging Digital Citizenship Regimes: Postpandemic Technopolitical Democracies; Emerald: Bingley, UK, 2022.
Calzada, I. The right to have digital rights in smart cities. Sustainability 2021, 13, 11438. Special Issue “Social Innovation in
Sustainable Urban Development”. [CrossRef]
Calzada, I.; Pérez-Batlle, M.; Batlle-Montserrat, J. People-Centered Smart Cities: An exploratory action research on the Cities’
Coalition for Digital Rights. J. Urban Aff. 2021, 43, 1–26. [CrossRef]
Keith, M.; Lash, S.; Arnoldi, J.; Rooker, R. China Constructing Capitalism; Routledge: London, UK, 2014.
Jingchun, C. Protecting the right to privacy in China. Vic. Univ. Wellingt. Law Rev. 2005, 36, 645. [CrossRef]
Zhou, H.H. Parallel or Intersection: The Relationship between Personal Information Protection and Right to Privacy in China.
Peking Univ. Law J. 2021, 33, 1167–1187.
Liz, F. Survey: Over 60% of China’s Online Shoppers Research Products Online Before Purchase. Available online: https:
//jingdaily.com/chinese-online-shoppers-research-online-before-purchase/ (accessed on 7 October 2021).
Emiliano, T.; Zizheng, Y. The Evolution and Power of Online Consumer Activism: Illustrating the Hybrid Dynamics of “Consumer
Video Activism” in China through Two Case Studies. J. Broadcasting Electron. Media 2021, 65, 761–785. [CrossRef]
Gillis, T.B.; Spiess, J.L. Big Data and Discrimination. Univ. Chic. Law Rev. 2019, 86, 459–487.
Liu, C.; Graham, R. Making sense of algorithms: Relational perception of contact tracing and risk assessment during COVID-19.
Big Data Soc. 2021, 8, 2053951721995218. [CrossRef]

Smart Cities 2022, 5

26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.

34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
55.

56.

1147

The China Personal Information Protection Law (PIPL). Available online: https://www2.deloitte.com/cn/en/pages/risk/
articles/personal-information-protection-law.html (accessed on 30 September 2021).
Zheng, G. Trilemma and tripartition: The regulatory paradigms of cross-border personal data transfer in the EU, the U.S., and
China. Comput. Law Secur. Rev. 2021, 43, 105610. [CrossRef]
Chen, J.; Sun, J. Understanding the Chinese Data Security Law. Int. Cybersecur. Law Rev. 2021, 2, 209–221. [CrossRef]
Hummel, P.; Braun, M.; Tretter, M.; Dabrock, P. Data sovereignty: A review. Big Data Soc. 2021, 8, 1–17. [CrossRef]
De Filippi, P.; McCarthy, S. Cloud computing: Centralisation and data sovereignty. Eur. J. Law Technol. 2012, 3, 1–18.
Esposito, C.; Castiglione, A.; Frattini, F. On data sovereignty in cloud-based computation offloading for smart cities applications.
IEEE Internet Things J. 2019, 6, 4251–4535. [CrossRef]
Floridi, L. The flight for digital sovereignty: What it is, and why it matters, especially for the EU. Philos. Technol. 2020, 33, 369–378.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
Calzada, I. Chapter 6—DEVOLVING smart city citizenship: Smart city-regions, data devolution, and technological sovereignty,
Editor: Igor Calzada. In Smart City Citizenship; Elsevier Science Publishing Co Inc.: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2021; pp. 219–234,
ISBN 9780128153000. [CrossRef]
Couture, S.; Toupin, S. What does the notion of ‘sovereignty’ mean when referring to the digital? New Media Soc. 2019, 21,
2305–2322. [CrossRef]
Digital Cooperative Research. You’re Data. You’re Control. You’re Profit. Available online: https://medium.com/digitalcooperative-research/youre-data-you-re-control-you-re-profit-5a181948011 (accessed on 8 August 2021).
Loukissas, Y.A. All Data Are Local: Thinking Critically in a Data-Driven Society; MIT Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2019.
Yanqing, H. “Game of Laws”: Cross-Border Data Access for Law Enforcement Purposes: Models in the United States, Europe, and China;
Beijing Institute of Technology School of Law: Yale, MI, USA, 2022; pp. 1–16.
Calzada, I. Replicating smart cities: The city-to-city learning programme in the Replicate EC-H2020-SCC project. Smart Cities
2020, 3, 978–1003. [CrossRef]
Calzada, I. Democratising smart cities? Penta helix multistakeholder social innovation framework. Smart Cities 2020, 3, 1145–1172.
[CrossRef]
Lytras, M.; Visvizi, A.; Kwok, T.C. (Eds.) ‘Big data research for social sciences and social impact’ Special Issue. Sustainability 2020,
12, 180.
Barns, S. Re-engineering the city: Platform ecosystems and the capture of urban big data. Front. Sustain. Cities 2020, 2, 32.
[CrossRef]
OECD. Data in the Digital Age; OECD: Paris, France, 2019.
United Nations. Report of the Secretary General: Roadmap for Digital Cooperation; UN: Nairobi, Kenya, 2020.
Masso, A.; Kasapoglu, T.; Tammpuu, P.; Calzada, I. Constructing digital deep borders through datafied selection: Estonian
E-residency as ‘Citizenship by Connection’ [Forthcoming]. Gov. Inf. Q. 2022.
Blume, P. Data protection and privacy—Basic concepts in a changing world. Scand. Stud. Law 2010, 56, 151–164.
What Is Data Privacy? Available online: https://www.snia.org/education/what-is-data-privacy (accessed on 30 September
2021).
Westin, A.F. Privacy and freedom. Wash. Lee Law Rev. 1968, 25, 166–170.
Pötzsch, S. Privacy awareness: A means to solve the privacy paradox? Future Identity Inf. Soc. 2009, 298, 226–236. [CrossRef]
Yao-Huai, L. Privacy and data privacy issues in contemporary China. Ethics Inf. Technol. 2005, 7, 7–15. [CrossRef]
Data Privacy Guide: Definitions, Explanations and Legislation. Available online: https://www.varonis.com/blog/data-privacy/
(accessed on 30 September 2021).
Seubert, S.; Becker, C. The Democratic Impact of Strengthening European Fundamental Rights in the Digital Age: The Example of
Provacy Protection. Ger. Law J. 2021, 22, 31–44. [CrossRef]
Changkun, S. How Chinese Social Entrepreneurs Stepped Up to Respond to COVID-19. Available online: https://skoll.org/2020
/05/04/how-chinese-social-entrepreneurs-stepped-up-to-respond-to-covid-19/ (accessed on 12 October 2021).
Almirall, E. Què Está Passant a La Xina Amb Les Technològiques? Available online: https://www.elnacional.cat/ca/opinio/
esteve-almirall-passant-xina-tecnologiques_639014_102.html (accessed on 12 October 2021).
Ioannou, A.; Tussyadiah, I. Privacy and surveillance attitudes during health crises: Acceptance of surveillance and privacy
protection behaviours. Technol. Soc. 2021, 67, 101774. [CrossRef]
Wang, R. Personal Information Protection Law: Five Significant Meanings. Available online: https://mp.weixin.
qq.com/s?__biz=MjM5OTE0ODA2MQ==&mid=2650943534&idx=1&sn=960bcb4bdea2b355454128fde19c0ee7&chksm=
bcc97f5c8bbef64ac4779c10c78938afa5e3d3e20090496d87033363fe357764232e92e04079&mpshare=1&scene=24&srcid=08
21TamppJEwbhUQbCoKBxze&sharer_sharetime=1629511080107&sharer_shareid=1a4fd694135664b5058f5b88f41fc22b&
exportkey=A5Fy9gBaqnCjUazer8OY8VI%3D&pass_ticket=mek7pUcvKTWxlt60yhtlaAVThiMlupGJF0vSBo1lUWxnUlkzS%
2FdvD8jyZRV0%2F8W3&wx_header=0#rd (accessed on 7 October 2021).
Cobb, S. Data Privacy and Data Protection: US Law and Legislation. ESET White Pap. 2016, 1–15. Available online:
https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=&ved=2ahUKEwjn3vC63IP6AhUzmYQIHRFuDT4
QFnoECBkQAQ&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.welivesecurity.com%2Fwp-content%2Fuploads%2F2018%2F01%2FUS-dataprivacy-legislation-white-paper.pdf&usg=AOvVaw1lYtt_VABfuVYTTWIuQpXy (accessed on 12 October 2021).

Smart Cities 2022, 5

57.
58.
59.
60.
61.

62.
63.
64.

65.
66.
67.
68.

69.
70.
71.
72.

73.

74.
75.
76.

77.
78.
79.
80.
81.
82.
83.
84.

1148

History of Privacy Timeline. Available online: https://safecomputing.umich.edu/privacy/history-of-privacy-timeline (accessed
on 30 September 2021).
European Data Protection Board (EDPB-EDPS). Joint Opinion 03/2021 on the Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and
of the Council on European Data Governance Act; EDPB: Brussels, Belgium, 2021.
European Commission. A European Strategy for Data; European Commission: Brussels, Belgium, 2020.
European Commission. Proposal Regulation: European Data Governance Act. Available online: https://digital-strategy.ec.
europa.eu/en/library/proposal-regulation-european-data-governance-data-governance-act (accessed on 8 August 2021).
Craglia, M.; Scholten, H.; Micheli, M.; Hradec, J.; Calzada, I.; Luitjens, S.; Ponti, M.; Boter, J. Digitranscope: The Governance of
Digitally-Transformed Society; EUR 30590 EN.; Publications Office of the European Union: Luxembourg, 2021; ISBN 978-92-7630229-2. JRC 123362; Available online: https://ec.europa.eu/jrc/en/publication/eur-scientific-and-technical-research-reports/
digitranscope-governance-digitally-transformed-society (accessed on 1 September 2022). [CrossRef]
Kigsing, M. The Political Economy of Digital Ecosystems: Scenario Planning for Alternative Futures; Routledge: Oxford, UK, 2022.
Calzada, I. The techno-politics of data and smart devolution in city-regions: Comparing Glasgow, Bristol, Barcelona, and Bilbao.
Systems 2017, 5, 18. [CrossRef]
Peng, Z.; Xu, C.; Wang, H.; Huang, J.; Xu, J.; Chu, X. P2B-Trace: Privacy-preserving blockchain-based contact tracing to combat
pandemics. In Proceedings of the SIGMOD ’21: 2021 International Conference on Management of Data, Virtual Event, China,
20–25 June 2021; Association for Computing Machinery: New York, NY, USA, 2022; pp. 2389–2393.
Monsees, L. Crypto-Politics: Encryption and Democratic Practices in the Digital Era; Routledge: Oxford, UK, 2019.
Nabben, K. A Political History of DAOs. Available online: https://www.fwb.help/wip/cypherpunks-to-social-daos (accessed
on 1 September 2022).
Chen, D.; Zhao, H. Data Security and Privacy Protection Issues in Cloud Computing. In Proceedings of the 2012 International
Conference on Computer Science and Electronics Engineering, Hangzhou, China, 23–25 March 2012; pp. 647–651. [CrossRef]
Peng, Z.; Xu, J.; Hu, H.; Chen, L. BlockShare: A Blockchain empowered system for privacy-preserving verifiable data sharing.
Bull. IEEE Comput. Soc. Tech. Comm. Data Eng. 2022, 14–24. Available online: http://sites.computer.org/debull/A22june/p14.pdf
(accessed on 1 August 2022).
Tavani, H.T.; Moor, J.H. Privacy protection, control of information, and privacy-enhancing technologies. SIGCAS Comput. Soc.
2001, 31, 6–11. [CrossRef]
Gao, S.; Peng, Z.; Tan, F.; Zheng, Y.; Xiao, B. SymmeProof: Compact zero-knowledge argument for blockchain confidential
transactions. IEEE Trans. Dependable Secur. Comput. 2022, 1–14. [CrossRef]
Wang, D.; Zhao, J.; Yingjie, W. A survey on privacy protection of Blockchain: The technology and application. IEEE Access 2020, 8,
108766–108781. [CrossRef]
Peng, Z.; Huang, J.; Wang, H.; Wang, S.; Chu, X.; Zhang, X.; Chen, L.; Huang, X.; Fu, X.; Guo, Y.; et al. BU-Trace: A
permissionless mobile system for privacy-preserving intelligent contact tracing. In Proceedings of the Database Systems for
Advanced Applications. DASFAA 2021 International Workshops: BDQM, GDMA, MLDLDSA, MobiSocial, and MUST, Taipei,
Taiwan, 11–14 April 2021; Springer: Taipei, Taiwan, 2021; pp. 381–397. [CrossRef]
Stanford DAO Workshop; Frances, C. Arrillaga Alumni Center at Stanford University. DAO Research Collective, Megagov,
Smart Contract Research Forum, and Stanford Center for Blockchain Research. 2022. Available online: https://docs.google.com/
document/d/1x4I_2JpYGVM3F_B7itGYLCIzkFYxCqPR-tTtpfhU9Gg/edit#heading=h.e49ioc2rm0zd (accessed on 1 January
2020).
Rennie, E.; Zargham, M.; Tan, J.; Miller, L.; Abbott, J.; Nabben, K.; De Filippi, P. Towards a participatory digital ethnography of
blockchain governance. Qual. Inq. 2022, 28, 837–847. [CrossRef]
The Personal Information Protection Law in China: A Legal Analysis. Available online: https://www.china-briefing.com/news/
the-personal-information-protection-law-in-china-a-legal-analysis/ (accessed on 30 September 2021).
Creemers, R.; Webster, G. Translation: Personal Information Protection Law of the People’s Republic of China (Effective Nov.
1, 2021). Available online: https://digichina.stanford.edu/news/translation-personal-information-protection-law-peoplesrepublic-china-effective-nov-1-2021 (accessed on 7 October 2021).
PIPL (Personal Information Protection Law). Available online: https://m.thepaper.cn/baijiahao_14154156 (accessed on 7 October
2021).
Calzada, I.; Cowie, P. Beyond smart and data-driven city-region? Rethinking stakeholder-helixes strategies. Reg. Mag. 2017, 308,
25–28. [CrossRef]
Cooper, Z.G.T. Of dog kennels, magnets, and hard drives: Dealing with Big data peripheries. Big Data Soc. 2021, 8,
20539517211015430. [CrossRef]
Van Dijck, J. Datafication, dataism and dataveillance: Big data between scientific paradigm and ideology. Surveill. Soc. 2014, 12,
197–208. [CrossRef]
Van Dijck, J.; Hacker, K. The digital divide as a complex and dynamic phenomenon. Inf. Soc. 2003, 19, 315–326. [CrossRef]
Sadowski, J. When data is capital: Datafication, accumulation, and extraction. Big Data Soc. 2019, 6, 1–12. [CrossRef]
Ada Lovelace Institute. Exploring Legal Mechanisms for Data Stewardship; Ada Lovelace Institute: London, UK, 2021.
Liu, J.; Zhao, H. Privacy lost: Appropriating surveillance technology in China’s fight against COVID-19. Bus. Horiz. 2021, 64,
743–756. [CrossRef]

Smart Cities 2022, 5

85.

1149

Calzada, I. Chapter 7—PROTECTING smart city citizenship: Citizens’ digital rights and AI-driven algorithmic disruption. In
Smart City Citizenship; Calzada, I., Ed.; Elsevier Science Publishing Co Inc.: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2021; pp. 219–234, ISBN
9780128153000. [CrossRef]
86. Kitchin, R. Civil liberties or public health, or public liberties and public health? Using surveillance technologies to tackle the
spread of COVID-19. Space Polity 2020, 24, 362–381. [CrossRef]
87. Li, H.; Wang, S. The role of cognitive distortion in online game addiction among Chinese adolescents. Child. Youth Serv. Rev. 2013,
35, 1468–1475. [CrossRef]
88. Micheli, M.; Ponti, M.; Craglia, M.; Suman, A.B. Emerging models of data governance in the age of datafication. Big Data Soc.
2020, 7, 1–15. [CrossRef]
89. Caragliu, A.; Del Bo, C.F. Smart cities and urban inequality. Reg. Stud. 2021, 56, 1097–1112. [CrossRef]
90. Calzada, I.; Cobo, C. Unplugging: Deconstructing the Smart City. J. Urban Technol. 2015, 22, 23–43. [CrossRef]
91. Ernst & Young. The California Consumer Privacy Act: Overview and Comparison to the EU GDPR. Available online: https:
//assets.ey.com/content/dam/ey-sites/ey-com/en_gl/topics/advisory/ey-the-california-consumer-privacy-act.pdf (accessed
on 7 October 2021).
92. Chin, Y.-C.; Zhao, J. Governing cross-border data flows: International trade agreements and their limits. Laws 2022, 11, 63.
[CrossRef]
93. Voss, W.G. Cross-Border Data Flows, the GDPR, and Data Goverrance. Wash. Int. Law J. 2020, 29, 485–532.
94. Data Localization—Advantages & Challenges. Available online: https://tidesacademy.com/data-localization-advantageschallenges/ (accessed on 7 October 2021).
95. Luca, B. EU Countries Green Light New Data Governance Framework. Available online: https://www.euractiv.com/section/
data-protection/news/eu-counties-green-light-new-data-governance-framework/ (accessed on 12 October 2021).
96. Cheng, H.; Lai, Y.; De, T. Decoding the decision-making in the new wave of urban redevelopment in China: A case study of a
bottom-up industrial land redevelopment in Shenzhen. Land Use Policy 2021, 111, 105774. [CrossRef]
97. Shenzhen Special Zone News. The Total GDP of Shenzhen in 2020: 2.77 Trillion Yuan. Available online: http://www.sz.gov.cn/
szzt2010/yqfk2020/szzxd/content/post_8534669.html (accessed on 12 October 2021).
98. Greater Bay Area. Outline Development Plan for the Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Greater Bay Area. 2019. Available online:
https://www.bayarea.gov.hk/filemanager/en/share/pdf/Outline_Development_Plan.pdf (accessed on 5 September 2022).
99. Will, K. Shenzhen SEZ, China. Available online: https://www.investopedia.com/terms/s/shenzhen-sez-china.asp (accessed on
12 October 2021).
100. Tencent. Available online: https://www.tencent.com/en-us/ (accessed on 12 October 2021).
101. Huawei. Available online: https://www.huawei.com/en/ (accessed on 12 October 2021).
102. DJI. Available online: https://www.dji.com/cn (accessed on 12 October 2021).
103. OnePlus. Available online: https://www.oneplus.com/cn (accessed on 12 October 2021).
104. SF Express. Available online: https://www.sf-express.com/cn/en/ (accessed on 12 October 2021).
105. BBC. Amazon Hit with $886m Fine for Alleged Data Law Breach. Available online: https://www.bbc.com/news/business-5802
4116 (accessed on 12 October 2021).
106. Sohu. China Has Initiated a Cybersecurity Review on the Direct Employment of DIDI, BOSS. Available online: https://www.
sohu.com/a/494313644_114778 (accessed on 12 October 2021).
107. Sina. Ministry of Industry and Information Technology Rectifies Internet Privacy Issues. Available online: https://t.cj.sina.com.
cn/articles/view/6327900155/1792c17fb00101489b (accessed on 12 October 2021).
108. Shenzhen Evening News. Shenzhen’s enterprises keep data security for users. Available online: https://k.sina.com.cn/article_19
13382117_720be4e501901909p.html (accessed on 12 October 2021).
109. The Paper. Liang Zhenying: Cross-Border Circulation of Data has Become a New Subject of Urban Integration in the Greater Bay
Area. Available online: https://finance.sina.com.cn/tech/2021-09-26/doc-iktzqtyt8253796.shtml (accessed on 12 October 2021).
110. Shenzhen Municipal Service Data Administration. Shenzhen Special Economic Zone Data Regulations Officially Announced.
Available online: www.sz.gov.cn/szzsj/gkmlpt/content/8/8935/post_8935483.html#19236 (accessed on 12 October 2021).
111. Shenzhen Municipal Government Data Open Platform. Available online: Opendata.sz.gov.cn (accessed on 12 October 2021).
112. Glibal Open Data Application Innovation Competition. Available online: https://www.sodic.com.cn/ (accessed on 12 October
2021).
113. Shenzhen Special Zone News. Shenzhen Implements “Red, Yellow And green” Color Separated Electronic Health Code. Available
online: http://www.sz.gov.cn/cn/xxgk/zfxxgj/zwdt/content/post_6991757.html (accessed on 12 October 2021).
114. GroBe-Bley, J.; Kostka, G. Big Data dreams and reality in Shenzhen: An investigation of smart city implementation in China. Big
Data Soc. 2021, 8, 20539517211045171. [CrossRef]
115. Shenzhen University. Available online: https://en.szu.edu.cn/ (accessed on 12 October 2021).
116. The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen. Available online: https://www.cuhk.edu.cn/en (accessed on 12 October 2021).
117. Southern University of Science and Technology. Available online: https://www.sustech.edu.cn/en/ (accessed on 12 October
2021).
118. Jiang, K. Shenzhen University: Data security protection starts from data classification. China Educ. Netw. 2021, Z1, 73–75.

Smart Cities 2022, 5

1150

119. Cotter, K.; Medeiros, M.; Pak, C.; Thorson, K. “Reach the right people”: The politics of “interests” in Facebook’s classification
system for ad targeting. Big Data Soc. 2021, 8, 2053951721996046. [CrossRef]
120. Larry, Y. The emergence of social entrepreneurs in China. J. Int. Counc. Small Bus. 2020, 1, 32–35. [CrossRef]
121. South China Morning Post. Wider Lockdowns in Shenzhen Trigger Exodus of Travellers as China’s Tech Hub Comes to a
Standstill. Available online: https://www.scmp.com/tech/policy/article/3191031/wider-lockdowns-shenzhen-trigger-exodustravellers-chinas-tech-hub (accessed on 2 September 2022).

