UNSW
THE UNIVCRSITY Of NCW SOUTH WAL[S
SYDNEY · CANBERRA · AUSTRM IA

Law

University of New South Wales Law Research Series

China’s Completed Personal
Information Protection Law: Rights
Plus Cyber-security

Graham Greenleaf

[2021] UNSWLRS 91
(2021) 172 Privacy Laws & Business International Report 20-23

UNSW Law
UNSW Sydney NSW 2052 Australia

E: LAW-Research@unsw.edu.au
W: http://www.law.unsw.edu.au/research/faculty-publications
AustLII: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/journals/UNSWLRS/
SSRN: http://www.ssrn.com/link/UNSW-LEG.html

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3989775

China’s completed Personal Information
Protection Law: Rights plus cyber-security
Graham Greenleaf, Professor of Law & Information System, UNSW Australia
(2021) 172 Privacy Laws & Business International Report 20-23
On 20 August 2021 the Standing Committee of China’s National People’s Congress (SC-NPC,
not the NPC itself) enacted the Personal Information Protection Law (PIPL), the culmination
of over a decade of incremental legislative reform.1 Businesses must adjust rapidly to the law’s
starting date of 1 November 2021.
Since the first draft of the PIPL was released by the SC-NPC in October 2020, it has been
revised in a succession of drafts. One purpose of this article is to detail these changes. The other
purpose is to place the PIPL in the context of China’s near-complete cyber-security laws, of
which it is part.

Final amendments to the PIPL

The first draft of the PIPL was analysed in PL&B in December 2020,2 as were the subsequent
drafts.3 Of the 74 sections in the final Law, half have had non-trivial amendments since the
first draft. Some of the amendments are significant, although none involve fundamental
changes to the direction of the first draft.
The purpose of the legislation is no longer stated to be to ‘ensure the orderly and free flow’ of
personal information, but rather ‘to protect rights and interests in personal information… and
to promote the reasonable use of personal information’. It now says it ‘is drafted on the basis
of the Constitution’ (art. 1), although Chinese citizens cannot sue to enforce constitutional
rights directly.4

Lawful processing changes
The lawful grounds for processing (called ‘handling’ throughout the PIPL) have been
somewhat expanded to include ‘carrying out human resource management’ and ‘reasonable
scope of handling personal information that has been disclosed by the individual or otherwise
already legally disclosed’. It is made clear that consent is not an additional requirement for
legitimate grounds of processing (art. 13). Unlike the GDPR, there is no equivalent to
protecting the legitimate interests of the controller or a third party. However, administrative
regulations may add ‘other situations’ as lawful grounds (art. 13(7)).

Rights and obligations changes
Controls over automated decision-making (art. 24) were already strict, requiring that handlers
‘ensure the transparency of the decision-making and that the results are fair and equitable.’
Now they are made even tighter, with rights to refuse such decision making, requirements to
1

For origins and history, see G. Greenleaf Asian Data Privacy Laws (OUP 2014), pgs. 204-20.
G. Greenleaf ‘China issues a comprehensive draft data privacy law’ (2020) 168 Privacy Laws & Business
International Report, 1, 6-10. https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3795001
3
G. Greenleaf ‘Asia’s Privacy Reform Bills: Variable Speeds’ (2021) 171 Privacy Laws & Business International
Report 26-29. https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3899557
4
Greenleaf Asian Data Privacy Laws pgs. 196-7.
2

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3989775

China’s completed Personal Information Protection Law: Rights plus cyber-security

2

provide options ‘that do not target specific personal characteristics’, bans on ‘unreasonable
differential treatment of individuals in transaction conditions such as price,’ and rights to
explanations of such processing. These provisions are at least as strong as those in the GDPR
A right of data portability has been added to the right of access (art. 45).
Rights concerning the deceased have been added (art. 49), to be exercised by their ‘close
relatives’ ‘in order to protect their own lawful and legitimate interests; except as otherwise
arranged by the deceased during their lifetime’.
Individuals now have an explicit right to sue in the courts a personal information handler that
refuses to allow them to exercise their rights (art. 50).
The application of the law to ‘state organs’ has been weakened slightly, with consent
requirements being replaced by notifications (art. 35). Some exceptions in favour of state
organs will also apply to some private sector bodies with ‘public affairs management duties’
(art. 37). Nevertheless, it remains one of the most remarkable aspects of PIPL that it applies in
such a sweeping fashion to state organs – at least on paper.

Administration and enforcement changes
It is now explicit that actions for compensation are only available if a breach ‘causes harm’,
and the handlers ‘cannot prove that they are not at fault’ (art. 69). It is not possible to seek
compensation merely because of the breach.
Where large numbers of persons are affected ‘legally designated consumer protection
organisations’ (China’s NOYBs) can act on their behalf (art. 70). Litigation by ‘privacy
NGOs’ has been one of the main driving forces in the first three years of the GDPR.
New penalties for breaches include banning individuals from supervisory roles.
The dominant role of the ‘state internet information department’ (Cyberspace Administration
of China (CAC)) is further strengthened, at the expense of departments of the State Council,
with a list of new roles added, including drafting ‘specialized rules’ in relation to small
businesses, sensitive personal information and artificial intelligence.

‘Platform services’ obligations
Special obligations on providers of platform services were added by the second draft of PIPL.
‘Personal information handlers that provide important internet platform services, have a huge
number of users or a complex operational model’ (none of which are defined) have additional
obligations, the second of which is new in the final law:
1. Establish an independent body comprised mainly of external personnel to conduct
oversight of personal information handling activities.
2. Draft fair platform rules, clarifying norms for the handling of personal information by
providers of products and services on the platform.5
3. Stop providing services to products or service providers on the platform that handle
personal information in serious violation of laws and administrative regulations.

Wording in PIPL: ‘‘Comply with the principles of openness, fairness, and equity to draft platform rules,
clarifying norms for the handling of personal information in for (sic) the providers of products and services on
the platform, and for their obligations to protect personal information’.
5

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3989775

China’s completed Personal Information Protection Law: Rights plus cyber-security

3

4. Periodically publish ‘public social responsibility reports on the protection of personal
information, and accept societal oversight.’
Obligations 2 and 3 mean that platform operators must therefore discipline their users in
relation to privacy. These obligations are imposed on both Chinese and foreign platform
operators. Which operators will required to comply is unknown, but initially they are likely to
be only the largest.

Extra-territorial application
The PPIL has extra-territorial application to processing outside the PRC, including
processing for the purpose of providing products and services (marketing) to persons in the
PRC, or analysing and assessing the conduct of such persons (like the GDPR), but unlike the
GDPR ‘other situations provided for by law or administrative regulations’ yet to be defined
(art. 3). Extra-territoriality under China’s law can therefore by expanded by other laws or
regulations.
Such extra-territorial processors must designate representatives within the PRC and advise
their identity to the relevant supervisory authorities (art. 53). Since such foreign processors are
subject to all the requirements of this PRC law, this will be a significant risk factor for both
them and their local representative. Will foreign processors do so, or will they ignore this
requirement? Will organisations already present in China, but doing processing within article
3 overseas, have any realistic choice? Similar representation requirements apply to any party
handling personal information at a volume specified by the CAC (art. 52), probably including
platform operators.

Data localisation and data exports
The PPIL’s provisions on data localization and exports (articles 38-43) have changed through
the various drafts, and need to be considered as a whole.
(1) A copy must be stored within PRC territory of personal information held by Critical
Information Infrastructure Operators (CIIOs) or collected or generated within the PRC
and processed ‘at the volume provided for’ by the state internet information
departments (ie the Cyberspace Administration of China (CAC)) (art. 40).
(2) Personal information can only be exported ‘overseas’6 when at least one of four
conditions is satisfied (art. 38):
a) ‘Passing a safety assessment organized by the national network information
department’ (CAC), unless exempt (under art. 40) from such an assessment by laws,
regulations or provisions of the CAC.
b) ‘Having a professional body conduct personal information protection certification
in accordance with provisions of the State Internet Information Departments’ (led
by the CAC). A certification system will need to be established for this purpose,
with clarification of whether certification is per transfer, per transfer type, or per
business, and for what duration.7

6

The first draft PIPL said ‘outside the PRC’, so it is possible but uncertain that this prohibition might also include
Hong Kong.
7
See DLA Piper ‘China: New draft national, harmonised data protection law for Mainland China’ Lexology, 26
October 2020.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3989775

China’s completed Personal Information Protection Law: Rights plus cyber-security

4

c) ‘Contracts concluded with the overseas recipient parties in accordance with
standard contract drafted by the [CAC] [which] agree upon the rights and
obligations of both parties.’8 It seems these will play an equivalent role to the
GDPR’s Standard Contractual Clauses (SCCs).
d) ‘Other conditions provided for by laws, administrative regulations, or provisions of
the State Internet Information departments’.
In addition (and not as alternative grounds for export), three other conditions must be
satisfied: (i) the export must be necessary (‘truly need’) ‘due to business requirements’
(art. 38); (ii) the consent of the individuals affected must be obtained, after provision
of data about the overseas transfer (art. 39); and (iii) a ‘personal information protection
impact assessment’ must be conducted (art. 55), with specific requirements, and a copy
retained (art. 56). The cumulative effect of these requirements may be prohibitive.
Another amended provision concerning conditional exports is that ‘requests for the
provision of domestically-stored personal information from foreign justice or law
enforcement’ authorities, information handlers (controllers) must not provide this
information ‘without the permission of the competent organs of the PRC’ (art. 41).9
(3) If any of the above conditions for exports (a) – (c) are implemented in very restrictive
manner by CAC, export would in effect be prohibited). Two clauses create new and
uncertain types of prohibitions, by allowing retaliatory measures to be taken by China
against overseas companies, countries or regions (arts. 42 and 43).10 They create a new
type of risk for companies, that their own governments take actions that could result in
their country becoming subject to Chinese retaliatory actions which could adversely
affect their company.
An alternative basis for exports is that ‘international treaties and agreements’ which ‘have
requirements for the provision of personal information overseas and so forth’ ‘may be
implemented’ (art. 38).

Adequacy or negotiation?
Are these export conditions ‘just Chinese adequacy’? None of the conditions in article 38(2)(a)(d) refer directly to the state of the law in the receiving country, so conditional exports in China
have little similarity to ‘adequacy’ in the EU. Also, there are no objective criteria for consent
to export, no role for an independent Data Protection Authority (the PIPL does not provide for
one), and no provisions for data controllers to appeal to a court against a CAC decision. CAC
control over the above conditions (a)-(d) amounts to CAC discretion to prohibit some
categories of export completely. Some commentators conclude that this is likely to result in de
facto export prohibition because ‘companies will greatly reduce cross-border transfers of
8

The first draft referred to a contract with the overseas recipient where the rights and obligation, and oversight,
comply with ‘standards provided for in this Law’. The 2nd and 3rd drafts of the law tightened this condition very
considerably. The 2nd draft appeared to say that standard clauses developed by the CAC would play an equivalent
role to the GDPR’s Standard Contractual Clauses (SCCs), and would probably be compulsory. The 3rd draft went
further, with some commentators interpreting it as requiring that the contract be tripartite, with the CAC also as a
party (see Galaad Delval ‘China: The draft PIPL – Shifting into third gear’ Data Guidance, June 2021) This
interpolation of the CAC into the contract formation process may have had a ‘chilling effect’ on the enthusiasm
of companies to use this option, but it does not appear in the final version enacted.
9
The first draft provided that where it is necessary for ‘international judicial assistance or administrative law
enforcement assistance’, approval by the relevant regulatory authority is required, unless a treaty or agreement
concluded by or participated in by the PRC provides authority. The enacted version of art. 41 is very different.
10
For details, see Greenleaf ‘China issues a comprehensive draft data privacy law’.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3989775

China’s completed Personal Information Protection Law: Rights plus cyber-security

5

personal information, as all available transfer mechanisms now require heavy administrative
undertakings’.11 An unfettered government discretion to prohibit export of unspecified
categories of personal data, such as the CAC can be argued to have, is one of the types of data
localisation about which its opponents (including advocates of the ‘free flow of personal data’
that accept conditional restrictions) have the highest concerns.
Rather than setting out clear and objective conditions for the export of personal data, PIPL’s
approach is to turn this into a negotiation with the CAC or other PRC authorities. This is
consistent with the international engagement requirement that ‘the state is to actively
participate in the formulation of international rules for protecting personal information, and
promote mutual recognition of rules and standards for the protection of personal information
with other countries, regions, and international organizations’ (art. 12). When coupled with the
allowance of data export provisions in treaties and agreements (art. 38, above), this seems to
open the way for China to negotiate mutual data export agreements, multilateral or bilateral. It
remains to be seen whether this approach will play a significant role in China’s international
engagements such as its application to become a party to the Comprehensive and Progressive
Trans-Pacific Partnership (CPTPP), or in relation to the 165 countries that it has agreements
with under its ‘Belt and Road Initiative’.12

PIPL’s context: China’s cybersecurity laws
From its role in regulating data exports, it is clear that PIPL also plays a role in China’s
emerging cyber-security structure. The Cybersecurity Law (CSL)13 of 2016 and the Data
Security Law (DSL)14 of 2021 also refer to more strict data localization and export rules that
are to be developed to apply to ‘critical information infrastructure operators’ (CIIOs), and to
other data handlers of ‘important’ data, but both CII and ‘important data’ remained without
definition15 until the new Regulations on Critical Information Infrastructure (CII) Security
Protection (‘CII Regs), which took effect on 1 September 2021.16
The CII Regs set out general factors relevant to a classification of CII (mainly concerning the
extent of harm likely to flow from its disruption), and delegates responsibility for identifying
CII and determining CIIO status to ‘individual sectoral regulators and responsible government
departments, acting under supervision of the [CAC]’.17 However, the effect of a classification
as CII on the export of personal data remains unclear.18 PIPL requires that a copy be held within

11

Galaad Delval op cit.
H. Davidson ‘China owed $385bn – including ‘hidden debt’ from poorer nations, says report’ The Guardian 1
October 2021 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2021/sep/30/42-nations-owe-china-hidden-debts-exceeding10-of-gdp-says-report?CMP=Share_iOSApp_Other>
13
G. Greenleaf, and S. Livingston ‘China's New Cybersecurity Law – Also a Data Privacy Law? (2016) 144
Privacy Laws & Business International Report 1-7.
14
J. Li and J. P. Tomaszewski ‘China’s New Data Security Law’ Lexology 9 July 2021; a translation of the Data
Security Law is available from China Law Translate.
15
The DSL says that both it and the CSL require that ‘security management measures for the export’ of both data
collected or produced by CIIOs, and ‘other important data’ are to be drafted by the CAC in cooperation with the
‘relevant departments of the State Council’ (art. 31).
16
For a concise analysis of the relationship between the CII Regs and the PIPL, see Freshfield Bruckhaus Deringer
authors ‘China’s restrictions on cross-border data transfer’ Lexology 15 September 2021.
17
ibid
18
The Regulation has been described as ‘bizzarely’ totally silent on the question of what implications a
classification of ‘critical information infrastructure’ will have for the export of personal data: Bird & Bird LLP
‘China Released Regulation on Critical Information Infrastructure’ Lexology, 8 September 2021.
12

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3989775

China’s completed Personal Information Protection Law: Rights plus cyber-security

6

the PRC, and that a safety assessment organized by the CAC is required, unless there is an
exemption (art. 40).
‘Important data’, which could include some personal data, is also to have special export rules
formulated by the CAC (CSL art. 37). The CSL and DSL do not define ‘important data’, but
the DSL delegates to regional and sectoral regulators to formulate catalogues of important data,
and to designate some of it as ‘core state data’ (art. 21).

Conclusions: Protecting rights and cyber-security interests
The result of the amendments in the final version of the PIPL is that the law is now less
ambiguous, and overall it gives stronger protection to data subjects. Almost all of the changes
detailed above benefit data subjects. Some do not benefit data controllers outside the PRC. The
result is a modern and sophisticated data privacy law, influenced by many advanced aspects of
the GDPR, and which in a few respects may be stronger than the GDPR. Of course, any such
judgments must await the law’s operation in practice, but with a starting date almost
immediately, evidence may be available soon. It must also be assessed in light of the PRC’s
state surveillance practices.
More than most data privacy laws, this law also has to be considered as part of China’s cybersecurity protections, because there are many ways in which the data export, data localisation,
extra-territorial, retaliatory and ‘platform’ provisions can be utilised to further the PRC’s
foreign policy objectives.
China’s law is both sufficiently in the mainstream of GDPR-influenced laws, and sufficiently
distinctive that it could become the first significant competitor to the EU in obtaining influence
over development of other national data privacy laws. It is possible that alternative models will
emerge when India finally enacts its law, or when the US discovers that it needs to compete for
global influence with its own modern data privacy law, abandoning the pretence that ‘notice
and consent’ is sufficient.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3989775

