THE COMPETITIVE EFFECTS OF THE GDPR
Michal S. Gal and Oshrit Aviv*
Forthcoming, Journal of Competition Law and Economics (2020)

TABLE OF CONTENTS
I. INTRODUCTION ....................................................................................... 1
II. SETTING THE STAGE .............................................................................. 7
A. Three Assumptions Regarding Data Markets ....................................... 7
B. Five Potential Business Models for Obtaining Data ............................ 9
III. SHAPING CHOICES: THE POTENTIAL EFFECTS OF LEGAL
LIMITATIONS ON THE FIVE BUSINESS MODELS ................................ 11
IV. POTENTIAL LEGAL AND TECHNOLOGICAL BYPASSES ....................... 25
A. Legal Obligations to Share Data .................................................. 25
B. Technological Solutions?............................................................... 27
V. POTENTIAL EFFECTS ON COMPETITION AND WELFARE ...................... 28
VI. CONCLUSION AND THE WAY FORWARD ............................................ 33
“To share data or not to share, that is the question...”

I. INTRODUCTION
In his famous picture, The Ambassadors, Hans Holbein the Yong painted a skull,
a symbol of mortality. This skull is a well-known example of anamorphosis: it can
only be seen when looking at the picture from a certain perspective.1 In this paper,
we engage in legal anamorphosis, analyzing the effects of the General Data Protection
Regulation (GDPR)2 from a perspective which to a large extent remains unexplored—
namely, its competitive effects. Our aim here is to provide a more holistic view of the
effects of the GDPR on social welfare, and to incentivize regulators to take steps to
ensure that government-mandated data governance tools indeed increase social welfare.



Professor of Law and Director of the Center for Law and Technology, University of Haifa Faculty of Law, and
President of the International Association of Competition Law Scholars (ASCOLA); Lawyer, Information System Scientist, Data Privacy Specialist and CEO at Entero.io, a data and technology compliance-by-design company. Many thanks to Stefan Bechtold, Damien Geradin, Inge Graef, Vikas Kathuria, Giorgio Monti, Tomas
Thombal, Nicolo Zingales, and participants in the workshop ‘Governing Data as a Resource’ organised by the
Tilburg Institute for Law, Technology, and Society (TILT) and the Tilburg Law and Economics Center (TILEC)
on 22 November 2019, for most helpful comments on previous drafts, and to Tamar Shmueli for valuable research assistance. The authors thank the Center for Cyber Law and Policy at the University of Haifa for funding.
Any mistakes or omissions remain the authors’.
1
Hans Holbein the Younger, The Ambassadors, 1533, National Gallery, London.
2
Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection
of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data, and
repealing Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection Regulation), OJ L 119/1, 4 May 2016.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3548444

2

The Competitive Consequences of the GDPR

2020

The increased importance of data in our information economy as an input for
innovation, economic growth, and societal interactions, along with the associated surveillance and security concerns,3 have brought data collection, processing, and use
issues to the fore. Such issues are affected by a combination of private incentives and
public measures. For example, voluntary sharing of data may be constrained by legal
limitations.4 The converse is also true: a data controller’s unwillingness to share his
data might be overridden by legal data sharing obligations.5 Understanding the interaction between private incentives and regulatory measures is thus essential for designing data governance models that can enable a well-functioning and socialwelfare-enhancing digital economy.
This paper focuses on one important aspect of this public/private interaction,
which so far has been largely neglected: an in-depth analysis of the effects of the
GDPR on competition and innovation, in particular the ability to realize economies in
scale and scope in data analysis. Commentators have recognized that the high costs
of putting in place a GDPR-compliant system might advantage large firms,6 that consent-based data collection creates comparative advantages to diversified or large firms
which collect their own data,7 that the use of some methods to collect data, such as
third-party tracking, has decreased,8 and that the costs of ensuring that an acquisition
target is GDPR-compliant might reduce incentives to merge.9 Empirical studies have
pointed to potential negative effects of the GDPR on competition and investment.10
Still, to our knowledge, no in-depth systematic analysis of the competitive effects of
the legal provisions of the GDPR has yet been undertaken. This is the task we attempt
here.

3

The Snowden revelations and similar privacy breaches generated a response in the form of another layer of
regulations covering the collection and use of data, and justifications for such.
4
As elaborated in this article, the GDPR is a prime example. Article 4(2) of the GDPR defines data processing
to include “making data available.”
5
See discussion infra.
6
See, e.g., i-Scoop, How the GDPR Impacts and Suffocates Small and Medium Businesses, https://www.iscoop.eu/gdpr/gdpr-small-medium-businesses/; Yedidiha Yueh, GDPR Will Make Big Tech Even Bigger,
FORBES (June 26, 2018), https://www.forbes.com/sites/forbestechcouncil/2018/06/26/gdpr-will-make-big-techeven-bigger/#41977f6e2592.
7
James David Campbell, Avi Goldfarb, and Catherine E. Tucker, Privacy Regulation and Market Structure,
24(1) JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS & MANAGEMENT STRATEGY 47 (2015).
8
P. Wagner, News Pages Are Abandoning Third-Party Ad Trackers, September 25th, 2018, https://www.statista.com/chart/15578/change-of-ad-tracking-techniques-since-gdpr/ (since the GDPR came into force third
party cookies decreased by 22 percent per page and third-party domains decreased by 4 percent).
9
See, e.g., Erin Grant, The Crucial Implications of GDPR on Mergers and Acquisitions, congruity360 14.6.2018;
Yahoo News, A new survey shows how the GDPR is impacting mergers and acquisitions, 26.11.2018, https://finance.yahoo.com/news/survey-shows-gdpr-impacting-mergers-160019175.html; Tim Bird, GDPR: Managing
Privacy is Now Key to Mergers and Acquisitions, PERSONNEL TODAY, May 24, 2019.
10
For a combined source of such studies see, e.g., Center for Data Innovation, Eline Chivot and Daniel Castro,
What the Evidence Shows About the Impact of the GDPR After One Year, June 17, 2019. We do not regard the
content of the empirical studies referred to throughout this paper as necessarily accurate. See also Michail Batikas et al., European Privacy Law and Global Markets for Data (2020, on file with author)(finding an increase
in market concentration in web technology services after the introduction of the GDPR. Google, the dominant
firm in many markets for web technologies, manages to increase its market share, whereas all other firms that
supply web technology either do not see a change in market share or suffer losses.), and sources cited there.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3548444

3

Competitive Consequences of the GDPR

2020

The importance of the GDPR cannot be overstated.11 It seeks to protect consumers and users from harms resulting from unauthorized and excessive use of their personal data (hereinafter, the term data will refer to personal data,12 unless specified
otherwise), in ways that might negatively affect human dignity and well-being, including but not limited to price discrimination, other forms of discrimination, blackmail, intangible nuisances, identity theft, and harm to autonomy.13 The GDPR also
seeks to change the balance of power between data subjects and data controllers,14
potentially enabling data subjects to enjoy a larger portion of the fruits from sharing
their data. Additionally, it seeks to ensure the free flow of data between EU member
states, inter alia by eliminating differences among such states with regard to data processing.15 Furthermore, it seeks to strengthen the trust users have that their personal
data will not be used in ways that do not comport with their reasonable expectations,
which is necessary for the efficient working of the market and for society to realize
the value of technology.16
At the same time, the GDPR creates inherent tradeoffs between data protection
and other dimensions of welfare, including competition and innovation.17 While some
of these effects were acknowledged when constructing the legal data regime, many
were disregarded.18 Furthermore, the magnitude and breadth of such effects may well
constitute an unintended and unheeded welfare-reducing consequence.19 As this article shows, the GDPR limits competition and increases concentration in data and data-

11

The right to the protection of personal data is enshrined in Article 8 of the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights
and in Article 16(1) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union. In this article we assume that the
GDPR effectively protects privacy. Some question the proposition that a system which relies mainly on notice
and consent as a basis for the lawful collection and use of data can indeed protect privacy. See, e.g., Written
Statement For The Record David Hoffman, Associate General Counsel and Global Privacy Officer, Intel Corporation, United States Senate Committee on the Judiciary Hearing on “GDPR & CCPA: Opt-ins, Consumer
Control, and the Impact on Competition and Innovation” (12.3.2019)(“ The notice-and-consent model is fatally
flawed; it must be replaced. People do not have time to read privacy policies for every interaction where their
personal data will be collected and used. Even if they did read these policies, it is unlikely they would be able to
understand how this data will be used”); Written Statement For The Record, Jane Bambauer, ibid (“A GDPRstyle of privacy right that gives consumers and end users full control over personal information has enormous
popular appeal, but ...will burden the digital economy with transaction costs, and there is little reason to think
that the compliance costs or behavioral changes will have a meaningful relationship to harm”); Nickolas Economides and Ioannis Lianos, Restrictions on Privacy and Exploitation in the Digital Economy: A Competition
Law Perspective (2019), https://www.ucl.ac.uk/cles/sites/cles/files/cles-5-2019.pdf (a market failure exist with
regard to privacy protection)
12
For the definition of personal data and its boundaries see Article 4(a) of the GDPR.
13
Alessandro Acquisiti, Curtis Taylor, and Liad Wagman, The Economics of Privacy, 54(2) JOURNAL OF
ECONOMIC LITERATURE 442 (2016); Niva Elkin-Koren and Michal S. Gal, The Chilling Effects of Governance
by Data, 86 CHI. L. REV. (2019).
14
This term shall relate to data controllers and processors, as defined in the GDPR, unless specified otherwise.
15
Recitals 3 and 9 of the GDPR.
16
For the effect of trust on markets see, e.g., Elkin-Koren and Gal, supra note 13.
17
For an example in the healthcare industry see William Nicholson Price et al., Shadow Health Records Meet
New Data Privacy Laws, 363(6426) SCIENCE 448 (2019)(the GDPR prevents the collections of health data outside the health system that provide detailed accounts of individual health, which can be used for innovation and
quality measurements).
18
See discussion infra of the Commission’s Impact Assessment of the GDPR.
19
Of course, the GDPR is not the only law which creates compliance costs which might affect competition. See,
e.g., Miguel de la Mano and Jorge Padilla, Big Tech Banking (2018), available at https://ssrn.com/abstract=3294723. Accordingly, the effect might be cumulative.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3548444

4

The Competitive Consequences of the GDPR

2020

related markets, and potentially strengthens large data controllers. It also further reinforces the already existing barriers to data sharing in the EU,20 thereby potentially
reducing data synergies that might result from combining different datasets controlled
by separate entities.21
To illustrate its claims, the article analyzes the competitive dynamics created by
the GDPR, focusing on how it affects the options available to firms for amassing the
data necessary for their operations, and their resultant ability to realize economies of
scale and scope in data analysis. A special focus is placed on the ability of firms to
share the data with other firms. Our analysis is based on a careful evaluation of GDPR
provisions and guidelines, as well as on interviews and survey data from firms for
which data constitutes an important input.22 Even at this early stage, in which market
players are still evaluating the effects of the new legal data regime on their operations,
the analysis reveals important effects on competition and innovation, many of which
are long-term.
We identify seven main parallel and cumulative market dynamics that may limit
competition and increase market concentration, of which only some have been recognized so far. First, as some commentators have already observed,23 the costs of organizing a dataset in a way which complies with the GDPR may be high and are
characterized by economies of scale. Accordingly, some small entrants might find it
unprofitable to collect data. Second, also as previously observed, the GDPR prohibits
or makes it more difficult to engage in some methods of data collection, creating comparative advantages to some data controllers. For example, in their seminal article
Campbell, Goldfarb and Tucker showed that the need to receive a user’s consent to
use his data imposes transaction costs for internal data collection, whose effects fall
disproportionately on less diversified or new firms.24 Both dynamics reduce the number of potential competitors in data collection.
Third, the GDPR reduces the economic incentives of firms to share any data collected. This is because those sharing data are still liable for monitoring its use by
anyone with whom the data is shared (hereinafter: data receivers).25 This, in turn, further reduces the number of data suppliers.
Fourth, even where data is shared, the GDPR may limit its use. To illustrate, it is
often costly, and sometimes impossible, to obtain informed consent from data subjects
to have their data shared with the data receiver, as may be required by the GDPR.
This effect is strengthened in a multi-product and/or multi-service environment, in
20

IDC and Open Evidence, European Data Market Study (2017) 75 https://ec.europa.eu/digital-singlemarket/en/news/final-results-european-data-market-study-measuring-size-and-trends-eu-data-economy. Only 6.3%
of European undertakings reported that they took an active part in data sharing and reuse.
21
See, e.g., OECD, DATA-DRIVEN INNOVATION: BIG DATA FOR GROWTH AND WELL-BEING (2015) at 193 (describing how the value of data “increases when the data can be linked with and integrated into other data sets”).
22
The questionnaire used for the survey is attached as Appendix A.
23
International Association of Privacy Professionals, IAPP-EY Annual Governance Report 2018 (2019),
https://iapp.org/resources/article/iapp-ey-annual-governance-report-2018/ (the average firm of 500 employees
must spend about $3 million to comply with the GDPR).
24
Campbell et al., supra note 7 (“The commonly used consent-based approach may disproportionately benefit
firms that offer a larger scope of services...This negative effect is particularly severe for goods where the price
mechanism does not mediate the effect, such as the advertising-supported internet”). The model assumes a onetime consent rather than a consent which grows with the use of the data. The GDPR imposes some consent
obligations which increase in line with privacy risks.
25
See discussion infra.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3548444

3

Competitive Consequences of the GDPR

2020

which consent is required for each different use of the data. The stronger the legal
limitations on using data collected by an external entity,26 the stronger the motivation
to collect it internally.
Fifth, the costs of non-compliance are high. Commentators point to the size of
fines that can be imposed on firms which fail to comply with the GDPR.27 To this we
add another effect which can sometimes be more significant: the virality of non-compliant data. The GDPR imposes a duty on the data receiver to ensure that any data
received from an external entity is GDPR-compliant. Accordingly, should non-compliant data be transferred from an external data controller and combined with the receiver’s data, the whole dataset could be polluted (i.e., considered non-compliant).
Virality may affect all types of data included in the dataset, including non-personal
data, so long as it is combined with—and cannot be easily separated from—the noncompliant personal data. Furthermore, and potentially more troubling, even if the
datasets can be separated ex post, any learning by an algorithm based on the combined
dataset cannot be easily reversed, especially if such learning was already translated
into products or services. Undoing such effects could significantly disrupt business
operations. To avoid such consequences, data receivers must engage in ongoing monitoring of their data suppliers’ collection and processing practices. This, in turn, might
further reduce incentives to use externally collected data, and strengthen incentives
for internal data collection.
Sixth, the GDPR creates uncertainty, which may impose higher costs on smaller
players, and might also enable large firms to use such uncertainty strategically, limiting the sharing of their data based on broad interpretations of the GDPR.28 Finally,
the GDPR, and especially the discussions surrounding it, could have an indirect effect
on data subjects, who might be more willing to provide their data to larger, more
reputable firms, or to firms with which they must interact, at least until the trust of
data subjects in the actual enforcement of data protection obligations is increased.29
The cumulative effect of such dynamics, explored in detail below, is a decline in
competition in data (and in data-based) markets. More often than in the pre-GDPR
period, 30 firms may now prefer to collect data internally. Where internal collection is
costly or impossible, firms will prefer to purchase data from external data suppliers.
Yet the GDPR reduces the number of potential data suppliers and increases the costs
of and barriers to data-sharing transactions. Accordingly, it is now substantially more
difficult for firms to realize data synergies through data sharing. Furthermore, where
data-based analysis requires a combination of personal and non-personal data, or

26

In this article, an external entity does not include a data processor who simply performs tasks for the data
controller.
27
Organizations in breach of GDPR can be fined up to 4% of annual global turnover or €20 million, whichever
is greater. Article 83 of the GDPR.
28
See discussion infra.
29
See discussion infra.
30
While limitations on data collection, processing and use also existed under the Data Protection Directive
95/46EC, the GDPR amplified them, inter alia by increasing fines for non-compliance, setting stricter requirements for data subjects’ consent, widening the territorial scope of the application and the definition of personal
data, and mandating privacy-by-design and the appointment of data protection officers in some instances.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3548444

6

The Competitive Consequences of the GDPR

2020

where difficulties arise in separating these two types of data,31 the effects of such
obligations may carry over to non-personal data. Thus, the GDPR might also indirectly affect the free flow of non-personal data.
These effects may harm productive and dynamic efficiency. They also call into
question the ability of EU firms to employ data sharing so as to increase their international comparative advantages in data-based markets, and to limit the market power
of those entities which already possess data-based comparative advantages.
The dynamics identified in this article offer partial explanations for some of the
troubling empirical evidence regarding investment in data-driven markets following
the adoption of the GDPR.32 A study conducted by the Merrill Corporation, for example, found that 58% of mergers and acquisitions professionals surveyed reported
having worked on transactions that did not go through due to concerns about the parties’ compliance with the GDPR.33 Another study found that, post-GDPR, the number
of deals involving EU ventures with data-related business activities decreased by almost 31%.34 Our study offers some potential explanations to the correlations found in
such studies. Furthermore, by identifying the market dynamics that affect data collection and competition, our study enables us to differentiate between the short- and
long-term competitive effects of the GDPR, and to identify which effects are likely to
dissipate and which are here to stay.
The article proceeds as follows. To set the stage for our regulatory impact assessment, Chapter II analyzes three basic assumptions regarding data markets, and five
alternative business models for gathering data: internal growth, merging, data-sharing
joint ventures, purchasing data, or purchasing data-based knowledge. Chapter III then
analyzes the main legal limitations imposed by the GDPR which affect the choice
between the five different business models. Chapter IV explores whether legal datasharing obligations or technological means can reduce the negative effects of the
GDPR on competition. First, we analyze the legal duty of data sharing based on the
right to data portability and the refusal-to-deal prohibition, to determine whether, and
to what extent, such mandatory requirements affect the dynamics of data sharing. We
then analyze the extent to which available technological solutions can assist firms in
overcoming some of the legal barriers and costs created by the GDPR. Chapter V

31

Such difficulties might be technical, such as identifying which data are private, or they may be legal, such as
defining what constitutes private data under the law. See, e.g., Inge Graef et al., Feedback to the Commission’s
Proposal on a Framework for the Free Flow of Non-Personal Data (2018), ssrn.com/abstract=3106791.
32
Center for Data Innovation, Eline Chivot and Daniel Castro, What the Evidence Shows About the Impact of
the GDPR After One Year, June 17, 2019.
33
Merrill Corporation, GDPR Burdens Hinder M&A Transactions in the EMEA Region, According to Merrill
Corporation Survey (November 13, 2018), https://www.merrillcorp.com/us/en/company/news/press-releases/gdpr-burdens-hinder-m-a-transactions-in-the-emea-region.html.
34
Jian Jia, Ginger Zhe Jin, and Liad Wagman, The Short-Run Effects of GDPR on Technology Venture Investment (May 31, 2019), http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3278912. For a different view see Lorien Sabatino and Geza
Sapi, Online Privacy and Market Structure: Theory and Evidence, Dusseldorf Institute for Competition Economics, Discussion Paper 308 (February 2019)(Their model assumes that those with superior technology need
less data to achieve similar results, and thus can outcompete their rivals on offering privacy policies. Once all
competitors are required to introduce privacy protection, the superior firms lose their comparative advantage.
However, the model disregards the different costs imposed on large and small firms in implementing the GDPR,
as explored in this article. It also disregards the effects on data-based innovation of the latter’s reduced ability to
enjoy economies of scale and scope).

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3548444

3

Competitive Consequences of the GDPR

2020

analyzes the effects of the GDPR on competition and innovation under diverse conditions, such as the height of economies of scale and scope in data analysis in the
specific market, and the ease of collecting similar data or data that is capable of
providing relatively similar information. As shown, under some market conditions the
GDPR has unintended and so far unrecognized effects on competition, efficiency, innovation, and the resultant welfare. Chapter VI concludes and suggests some means
of reducing such effects, while still protecting the vital goal of privacy.

II. SETTING THE STAGE
A. Three Assumptions Regarding Data Markets
Before we delve into the analysis of the GDPR, let us set the stage by briefly
reviewing some relevant characteristics of data markets. We then emphasize three
fundamental assumptions on which the analysis below is based.
Data markets consist of three main links along the data value chain: collection,
processing, and use of data-generated information and knowledge.35 Collection relates to the extraction of the data and its datafication, namely the recording, aggregation, and organization of information into a form that can be used for data mining,
including its transfer to servers.36 Processing relates to optimizing, cleaning, parsing
or combining different datasets, in order to organize the data for future extractions
and to find correlations. It can transform the raw data into information, defined as
data-in-context. Processing may also involve data analytics, thereby creating
knowledge. Use is defined as employing data-based information or knowledge for
prediction and decision-making in relevant markets. It can lead to improved or innovative processes, products, services, and predictions. This value chain also has a dynamic internal reciprocal dimension, in which by a process of machine learning,
information regarding the success of the algorithm’s past predictions may be used to
“teach” the algorithm so that it can make better predictions in the future, thereby creating a feedback loop.37
The analysis below is based on three assumptions with regard to data markets,
which are based on our current understanding of the information economy. The first
relates to the importance of data.38 As numerous studies have emphasized, with data
“rapidly becoming the lifeblood of the global economy,”39 the efficiency of its use
35

Other links may involve storage, sharing, or deletion/destruction.
See Katherine J. Strandburg, Monitoring, Datafication, and Consent: Legal Approaches to Privacy in the Big
Data Context, in Julia Lane et al., eds, PRIVACY, BIG DATA, AND THE PUBLIC GOOD: FRAMEWORKS FOR
ENGAGEMENT, 10–12 (Cambridge 2014) (discussing the three basic modes of data acquisition); Helen Nissenbaum, Deregulating Collection: Must Privacy Give Way to Use Regulation?, in DIGITAL MEDIA AND
DEMOCRATIC FUTURES, 8–9 (Michael X. Delli Carpini, ed., 2019), archived at http://perma.cc/HP4A-T2G2
(data is “constructed or created from the signals of countless technical devices and systems”).
37
Harry Surden, Machine Learning and Law, 89 WASH. L. REV. 87, 89–95 (2014).
38
The next two paragraphs are largely based on Michal S. Gal and Daniel Rubinfeld, Data Standardization, 94
NYU LAW REV.101 (2019).
39
European Political Strategy Ctr., European Comm’n, Enter the Data Economy: EU Policies for a Thriving
Data Ecosystem, 21 EPSC STRATEGIC NOTES 1 (Jan. 11, 2017), https://ec.europa.eu/epsc/sites/epsc/files/strategic_note_issue_21.pdf.
36

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3548444

8

The Competitive Consequences of the GDPR

2020

significantly affects both social and private welfare.40 Predictions based on patterns
and correlations identified in data affect numerous aspects of our lives, including
health, education, transportation, and sustainability.41 For some purposes, the collection and use of personal data may be essential.
The second assumption is that while data needs differ from one firm to another
and from one industry to another, for many applications the quality of knowledge that
can be extracted from data is correlated with the data’s volume (the amount of data
used in the analysis), its variety (the diversity of its sources), its veracity (accuracy
and reliability), and its velocity (freshness).42 This is for three reasons.43 First, data
analysis is often characterized by economies of scale and scope, at least up to a point.44
This implies that until such economies are reached, the more data is available and the
more varied the data, the better the knowledge that can be mined from it. As MayerSchönberger and Padova observe, “the value of data can be greatly enhanced...by
combining it with other data sources. It is like a single puzzle piece that taken by itself
offers little value, but when combined with others to complete an image is turned into
something precious.”45 Second, the volume, variety, veracity, and velocity of the data
may affect the quality of the algorithm used for its analysis, due to the algorithm’s
feedback loop, with the algorithm evolving from learning based on an analysis of past
predictions.46 Accordingly, the better the data, the better the algorithm and the better
its predictions. Finally, the qualities of a dataset can also create positive externalities
with respect to other datasets. This is because of “transfer learning”: an algorithm can
“learn” from a high-value dataset to perform tasks that can then be performed on other
datasets.47

40

See generally OECD, supra note 40 (describing how data now drives all aspects of innovation in the economy
and society).
41
See, e.g., COUNCIL OF ECON. ADVISORS, EXEC. OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT, BIG DATA AND DIFFERENTIAL
PRICING (2015), https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/default/files/whitehouse_files/docs/Big_Data_Report_Nonembargo_v2.pdf (examining the ability of companies to charge different prices to different consumers
based on predictions gathered from big data); Federal Trade Commission, BIG DATA: A TOOL FOR INCLUSION
OR EXCLUSION? (2016) available at https://www.ftc.gov/system/_les/documents/reports/big-data-tool-inclusion-or-exclusion-understanding-issues/160106big-data-rpt.pdf. (increasing some benefits to otherwise underserved populations).
42
See, e.g., MAURICE E. STUCKE AND ALAN P. GRUNES, BIG DATA AND COMPETITION POLICY (2016).
43
Gal and Rubinfeld, supra note 38.
44
STUCKE AND GRUNES, supra note 42, at 352–55. A debate ensues on the extent of such economies of scope in
different markets. With regard to search data see, e.g., Andres V. Lerner, The Role of “Big Data” in Online
Platform Competition 4–5 (2014), http://ssrn.com/abstract=2482780 (where data is not time sensitive, incremental data beyond a certain volume yields diminishing marginal returns to scale); Lesley Chiou and Catherine E.
Tucker, Search Engines and Data Retention: Implications for Privacy and Antitrust MIT Sloan Research Paper
No. 5094-14 (May 27, 2014), https://ssrn.com/abstract=2441333.
45
Viktor Mayer-Schönberger & Yann Padova, Regime Change? Enabling Big Data Through Europe’s New Data
Protection Regulation, 17 COLUM. SCI. & TECH. L. REV. 315, 320 (2016).
46
See STUCKE & GRUNES, supra note 42, at 170; Maryam Farboodi et.al., Big Data and Firm Dynamics, the
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 25515 (Jan. 2019)(Under data feedback loops, more
data leads to increased productivity, enabling firms to sell more and accumulate more data, thus further increasing productivity and creating an indirect network effect).
47
See, e.g. Lilyana Mihalkova et al., Mapping and Revising Markov Logic Networks for Transfer Learning, in
PROCEEDINGS OF THE 22ND CONFERENCE ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE (AAAI-07) 608, 608 (2007).

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3548444

3

Competitive Consequences of the GDPR

2020

The third assumption is that in many market settings data sharing plays an important role in realizing potential data-based benefits.48 This is because much data is
collected in a system that is largely modular and distributed.49 For example, as of this
writing, thirty billion Internet of Things devices, controlled by numerous market players, are hooked to the internet, collecting and using data.50 While, once collected, data
is non-rivalrous, in many markets entry barriers exist to data collection.51 In such a
system, data sharing may enable more entities to use the data and create data synergies. Furthermore, barriers to data sharing could result in the balkanization of data
within particular sectors or firms, thereby not only impeding innovation within markets, but also reducing spillovers to the improvement of analytical tools.52 Accordingly, broadening and improving the use of data through data sharing is likely to
increase the competitive advantages of firms and nations. Data subjects can enjoy
some of these benefits through better products as well as online transactions and interactions based on better matching. At the same time, the sharing of personal data
can be welfare-reducing due, inter alia, to price increases, price discrimination, and
intangible harms such as psychological discomfort and harm to freedom of speech.53
Sharing of personal data therefore creates complex, often ambiguous, tradeoffs that
require a careful and conscious balancing between the competing considerations.54
Yet at least in some situations, data sharing has significant potential for increasing
both private and public welfare.

B. Five Potential Business Models for Obtaining Relevant Data
When data constitutes an important input in a firm’s operations, it must choose
its strategy for collecting and processing such data. Based on interviews with market
participants, we identified five main strategies employed by market players for amassing relevant data, as follows:
1.
2.

Organic data collection (“first-party data”): the firm gathers the data directly
from the Data Subject;
Merging with an entity and using its data in your own operations;

See, e.g., Gal and Rubinfeld, supra note 38; De Streel and Thomas Tombal, “The Fifty Shades of Data Sharing
and the Law’ (2019, on file with author); VIKTOR MAYER-SCHONBERGER AND THOMAS RAMGE, REINVENTING
CAPITALISM IN THE AGE OF BIG Data (Basic Books, 2018).
49
See GREG ALLEN & TANIEL CHAN, BELFER CTR., HARVARD KENNEDY SCH., ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND
NATIONAL
SECURITY
27
(2017),
https://www.belfercenter.org/sites/default/files/files/publication/AI%20NatSec%20-%20final.pdf.
50
Internet of Things (IoT) Connected Devices Installed Base Worldwide from 2015 to 2025 (in Billions),
STATISTA, https://www.statista.com/statistics/471264/iot-number-of-connected-devices-worldwide (last visited
Mar. 20, 2019). Some firms enjoy comparative advantages in data collection. See infra Section x. The term
Internet of Things relates to the digitization of the physical world through the creation of a network of devices
(e.g., cars and refrigerators) that contain electronics, software, sensors, actuators, and connectivity which allows
them to connect, interact, and exchange data.
51
Daniel Rubinfeld and Michal S. Gal, Entry Barriers to Big Data, 59(2) ARIZONA L. REV. (2017).
52
Iain M. Cockburn et al., The Impact of Artificial Intelligence on Innovation, in THE ECONOMICS OF
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE: AN AGENDA 115, 125–28, 139–43 (Ajay K. Agrawal et al. eds., 2019).
53
Acquisiti et al., supra note 13.
54
Ibid.
48

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3548444

10
3.

4.
5.

The Competitive Consequences of the GDPR

2020

Buying/receiving the data from an external supplier (“third-party data”). This
option also includes the sharing of data through the use of an application programming interface (API). An API is an interface or communication protocol between a client and a server such that the server will initiate a defined
action, including providing data, in response to a recognized request by the client
for data in a specific format. APIs are the mechanism by which, for example,
firms can access data held by Facebook, for specific purposes such as authentication, once a data subject gives such firms permission to request such details;
Becoming part of a joint venture in which firms pool their data (or data-based
knowledge) for specific predefined purposes;55
Buying/receiving data-based knowledge (rather than data), or aggregated data,
from an external provider (knowledge broker). For example, Google provides a
service that uses its database to answer queries without exposing the data that
served as the basis for the answers. Similarly, market insight services provide
reports about general market trends. This option is not subject to the GDPR.

Options 1 and 5 generally do not allow for the realization of inter-firm data synergies.
Furthermore, option 5 is an outlier, since it does not enable the firm to use the data
internally, and therefore its use is limited to those instances where data-based
knowledge will suffice. We will therefore relate mainly to options 1 through 4.

Figure 1: Five options for obtaining necessary data or data-based knowledge

55

Firms may use the mechanism of joint controllers in accordance with Article 26 if the GDPR. In which case,
both Controllers will be jointly and separately responsible and liable for any data processing activity and compliance with the regulation vis-à-vis the data subject.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3548444

3

Competitive Consequences of the GDPR

2020

Firms choose from these options based on their relative cost-effectiveness, as well
as their feasibility and scalability, which, in turn, are affected by a combination of
technological, financial, strategic, and legal barriers. Technological barriers are those
factors which impede the collection or sharing of data—for example, barriers to interoperability between databases which were organized by different entities in accordance with different internal logics. Some such barriers may be overcome, but at a
cost—for example, the costs accruing from short-term system shutdowns necessary
to enable interoperability, or the costs of data lost due to interoperability limitations.56
Other technological barriers may be prohibitive, such as the inability to directly collect historical data ex post. Financial barriers are those factors which prevent data
from being amassed in a cost-effective way. For example, internal data collection is
financially feasible only when its benefits outweigh the costs of putting in place and
operating such a system. Strategic barriers are those erected by data owners in order
to retain their market power. For example, data controllers may set highly restrictive
terms, or may be reluctant to share their data at all, in order to preserve a comparative
advantage. Finally, legal barriers are those imposed by laws and regulations relating
to the collection, processing, and use of data, the GDPR being a prime example. Legal
barriers may affect the other types of barriers. For example, as elaborated below, the
requirement that data be transferred at the request of the data subject “where technically feasible”57 may affect the incentives of firms to adopt technical standards for
data portability and interoperability. In the analysis below, we treat non-legal barriers
as a given, and focus on how legal barriers affect the choice between the five business
models described above. As will be shown, in some cases the legal data regime has a
decisive effect on firms’ choices, given the regulatory power of the state in shaping
potential market interactions.

III. SHAPING CHOICES: THE POTENTIAL EFFECTS OF LEGAL LIMITATIONS
ON THE FIVE BUSINESS MODELS
A. Legal Obligations Regarding Data Collection, Processing, and Use
The GDPR imposes obligations regarding the collection, processing, storage, and
use (including sharing) of data. Below we analyze the main legal limitations that affect firms’ choices between the five business models for collecting the data necessary
for their operations—choices which, in turn, shape market structures.58 While the focus is on legal barriers, the analysis will also relate to the technological, financial, and
strategic barriers which are affected by the GDPR, where relevant.
As we show, the legal data regime affects the choice between the business models
for collecting data. The intuition is straightforward: where data is necessary for a
firm’s activities, it will seek the most efficient and least costly way to obtain it. For
instance, when sharing of data is not allowed or is too costly, firms will have stronger
incentives to engage in internal collection, and vice versa. The relative costs of meeting their legal obligations under different business models may therefore lead firms
56

Gal and Rubinfeld, supra note 38.
Article 20 of the GDPR.
58
The GDPR is still relatively new. Accordingly, our analysis is based on knowledge acquired so far.
57

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3548444

12

The Competitive Consequences of the GDPR

2020

to make choices they would otherwise not have made. This is, in fact, a modern example of the Coasean tradeoff between internal and external procurement of products
and services.59
Let us explore this proposition in greater depth. The stronger the contractual,60
legal,61 and reputational62 sanctions for non-compliance with the GDPR, the more
important it becomes for firms which need data for their operations to adopt business
models that ensure compliance. In the analysis below we assume that the extent of
such sanctions is sufficient to incentivize most firms to attempt to comply. Indeed,
beyond the increased fines imposed by the GDPR, we assume that firms today are
highly conscious of the reputational damage likely to follow any carelessness with
data—a product of heightened recognition of the potential harms resulting from security breaches, coupled with assimilation of the idea that data subjects own their personal data, which together have significantly increased the (theoretical) value data
subjects attach to data protection. Furthermore, as elaborated above, non-compliance
creates a risk of virality, where non-compliant data can pollute a whole dataset, the
algorithms that are trained on it, and the supply chain which relies on it.
To recognize how the GDPR affects firms’ choice between business models for
data collection, we must identify the different costs, risks, limitations, and benefits it
imposes on the different models. Some legal obligations are relevant only to some
business models and may therefore create comparative hurdles to adopting them.
Other legal obligations apply to all business models. Yet, as shown below, even general obligations may impose dissimilar compliance costs under different models.
While it is impossible to canvass in this short article all the relevant legal obligations,
we relate to five examples which we regard as having the strongest influence on the
choices firms make. These legal obligations apply to more methods for data collection
or sharing than in the pre-GDPR era.63
1. Ensuring the Lawfulness of Data Processing

59

Ronald Coase, The Nature of the Firm, 4 ECONOMICA 386 (1937)(Firms internalize production actions so long
as the costs of internal management and production are lower than the transaction costs of market relationships).
60
For instance, Microsoft’s Supplier Security and Privacy Assurance program applies to suppliers that process
Microsoft data on its behalf. Payment for services is conditional, inter alia, on compliance with data management
requirements under the GDPR. Microsoft, Supplier Security and Privacy Assurance, https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/procurement/sspa?activetab=pivot%3aprimaryr3.
61
A known yet unique example involves a €50 million fine levied on Google by the French data regulator for its
“lack of transparency, inadequate information and lack of valid consent regarding ads personalization”. The
CNIL’s Restricted Committee Imposes a Financial Penalty of 50 Million Euros Against Google LLC, 21 January
2019, https://www.cnil.fr/en/cnils-restricted-committee-imposes-financial-penalty-50-million-euros-againstgoogle-llc
62
As seen, for example, in the anger expressed by Instagram users when Facebook announced changes in the
site’s privacy policy after acquiring Instagram in 2012. See, e.g., Amy A. Hinkler, Privacy in the Age of Social
Media
Mergers
and
Acquisitions
(2013),
https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/2d3b/014ea02cd0e22305316e87fe8db0dd76b663.pdf.
63
To illustrate, the GDPR, in conjunction with the ePrivacy Directive, impose limitations on some technological
methods of data collection that were once widely used, and that were largely assumed to fall outside the scope
of “personal information” as previously defined. These include, inter alia, the use of anonymized web identifiers
such as cookies, tags and pixels, when they can lead to identification of a natural person. Recital 30 of the GDPR;
Recital 20 and Article B(25) of the ePrivacy Directive 2002, as amended in 2009.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3548444

3

Competitive Consequences of the GDPR

2020

All data processing must meet four fundamental requirements: data must be processed lawfully, fairly and transparently (lawful basis); must be collected for specified, explicit and legitimate purposes only (purpose limitation); must be limited to
data required for the entity’s defined purposes (data minimization); and must be kept
accurate and up-to-date.64 Lawfulness of data processing is based on six alternative
legal bases.65 The most relevant for our analysis involve a data subject’s consent for
processing his personal data, and a data controller’s “legitimate interest” in processing
the data.
Consent is defined as “any freely given, specific, informed and unambiguous indication of the data subject's wishes by which he or she, by a statement or by a clear
affirmative action, signifies agreement to the processing of personal data relating to
him or her.”66 The requirement for consent is dynamic, in the sense that the more data
is collected, or the more sensitive it is to identification or risk of a breach, the stronger,
more informed and active consent must be.67 Observe that consent must relate both to
the use being made of the data, and to the entity making such use. The assumption
here is that a data subject might be willing to accept a certain use of her data by one
specific entity, but not by another. Accordingly, a general consent to “use data for all
appropriate purposes,” or to “share data with others,” would not meet the necessary
conditions.68
Consent is generally easiest to obtain in the internal collection model, for two
main reasons. First, use by the entity which collects the data is more direct and intuitive.69 Second, consent for use by a certain entity may apply to all its internal units
and divisions. To illustrate, if a data subject consents to the use of her data by Google
for specified purposes, there is no need to obtain new consent for each of Google’s
internal units which makes such use of the data, or even for a new internal unit. In
economic terms this implies that economies of scale and scope exist in obtaining user
consent. This is a major advantage, since obtaining each data subject’s explicit and
informed consent for all the specific uses of the data pertaining to her is costly. This
also implies that large and diversified data controllers, which combine the consent
requirements for all their data uses, enjoy an advantage. Google, for example, asks
users to actively click a “sign up” button under the notification that such action means
consent to the firm’s data policy and cookie policy, and pertains to all its uses of the

64

Article 5 of the GDPR.
Article 6 of the GDPR.
66
Article 4(11) of the GDPR. Additional conditions are specified by Article 7 and recitals 42 and 43. The Article
29 Working Party adopted Guidelines on Consent under Regulation 2016/679 (April 16, 2018). For obstacles to
gathering data created by opt-in mechanisms see, e.g., Fred H. Cate & Michael E. Staten, Protecting Privacy in
the New Millennium: The Fallacy of “Opt-In”, available at http://bit.ly/2lvZ9uz.
67
Ibid.
68
Vikas Kathuria and Jure Globocnik, Exclusionary Conduct in Data-Driven Markets: Limitations of Data Sharing Remedy, in EU COMPETITION LAW REMEDIES IN DATA ECONOMY (Marco Botta ed., 2019). See also Article
29, Working Party, Guidelines on Transparency under Regulation 2016/679 (November 29, 2017), p. 9. The
requirement for transparency exists independently of the requirement to ensure that there is an appropriate legal
basis for data processing.
69
Here we relate to divisions within one entity. In case of common ownership of different entities (“business
groups”), data sharing between entities within the business group encounters higher hurdles. Recital 48 of the
GDPR.
65

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3548444

14

The Competitive Consequences of the GDPR

2020

user’s data.70 While users can opt out at any time from all or from select uses of their
data, this requires an action on their part. Furthermore, if the requesting firm enjoys a
reputation for protecting its users’ privacy, or users assume the firm already possesses
much information about them, consent may be more easily granted for a wider range
of purposes, creating a positive externality on new (but consented-for) uses. Moreover, multi-product or multi-service firms have many more entryways through which
they can obtain the consent of data subjects to use their data. Indeed, Campbell, Goldfarb and Tucker demonstrate that consumers are more likely to grant consent to large
networks with a broad scope rather than to less-established firms.71 Observe, however,
that strong market power adds another layer of complexity to obtaining consent. Consent requires that data subjects have a genuine and free choice as to whether or not
their data is to be processed for a particular purpose. At the same time, as Graef observes, when the data controller has significant market power, the consent provided
by a data subject might not fully meet those requirements.72
Sharing data with an external entity often encounters even higher hurdles in obtaining user consent. It requires the data subject to give her informed consent to the
specific use of the data by the external user. In some cases, where such sharing is
known, the initial request for consent may already include consent to the use of the
data by a specific third party, or at least, categories of third-parties with which the
data is being shared. Google, for example, requires that publishers that rely on its
services, such as The London Times, request its users to consent to third party tracking
by Google, to be used for its own analytical purposes, when they consent to using the
publisher’s services.73
Two owners of databases merge. Each obtained the consent of their data subjects
to their use of the data. Are they automatically allowed to merge their datasets, which
were created prior to the merger? The answer is negative, unless both merging entities
obtained the consent of their data subjects to the use of their data by the merged entity
for its specified purposes, or unless they can rely on an alternative basis for lawfulness. Indeed, in the Facebook–WhatsApp case, the attempt to merge data held by the
two entities raised breach-of-privacy concerns.74 A similar obstacle applies in the case
of a data-sharing joint venture.
To overcome such obstacles, many privacy policies and consent mechanisms include a condition that personal data may be shared in case of a merger or acquisition,
or that the user’s consent also applies to sharing the data with a third party for specified purposes. Yet this may not be sufficient where the consent was not sufficiently
specific with regard either to the additional use or to the identity of the new user.

70

For some purposes or sensitive data categories, additional consent requirements are imposed. For B2B services, the consent mechanism may be different, and processing of data is often based on a contract.
71
Campbell et al., supra note 7. For a suggestion that consumers are more likely to give consent to large firms
see A. M. McDonald and L. F. Cranor, The Cost of Reading Privacy Policies, 4(3) JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY
FOR THE INFORMATION SOCIETY (2008).
72
INGE GRAEF, EU COMPETITION LAW, DATA PROTECTION AND ONLINE PLATFORMS: DATA AS ESSENTIAL
FACILITY (2016).
73
Testimony of Alastair Mactaggart Chair, Californians for Consumer Privacy, Senate hearings, supra note 11.
74
Irish Data Protection Commission Statement on Proposed Integration of Facebook, WhatsApp and Instagram
(January 28, 2019), https://dataprotection.ie/en/news-media/press-releases/data-protection-commission-statement-proposed-integration-facebook.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3548444

3

Competitive Consequences of the GDPR

2020

Should the existing consent not meet these requirements, new consent must be obtained. In addition, where the sharing of data creates a high level of data sensitivity
resulting from data synergies, a higher bar to demonstrate consent.75 Some firms condition the continuation of their service on the user signifying whether and to what
extent he consents to such uses of his data. Yet should the service not be in constant
use by data subjects, it may take a long time to obtain such consent. Providing new
consent might also require an active step by users, something they might be reluctant
to do.
Legitimate interests pursued by the data controller or by a third party constitute
an alternative basis for lawful data processing.76 In such cases the controller must
perform a tripartite legitimate interests assessment. First, a legitimate interest must be
identified. Second, it must be demonstrated that processing is necessary for furthering
that interest. Third, the individual’s rights must be balanced against the legitimate
interest.77 In the balancing exercise all relevant considerations must be taken into account, including the nature and sensitivity of the data, its uses, and the protective
guarantees instituted by the controller to limit the privacy impact. Legitimate interests
can be used only when the processing was reasonably expected by the data subject,78
and its impact on his privacy was minimized.79
Legitimate interests are the most flexible basis for lawful use of data under the
GDPR.80 This basis covers a broad range of interests, including situations where data
processing is required to prevent fraud, for internal administrative purposes relating
to employees and clients, to ensure network and information security, to report possible criminal acts or threats to public security to a competent authority, for direct marketing, and for intra-group data transfers for certain types of data.81 However, the
boundaries of this basis for lawfulness are still unclear. Some suggest that the sale of
a customer database is allowed if data subjects are informed about the sale, and allowed to object to the transfer within a reasonable time frame.82 In one case, the online
travel agency TravelBird sold its customer database to its competitor Secret Escapes following the former’s bankruptcy. The buyer informed all data subjects about
the prospective sale of their personal records and gave them two weeks to object to
the transfer. The use of the dataset was limited to the consent given to its original
75

Recital 51 and article 9(1) of the GDPR.
Article 6(1)(f) of the GDPR.
Article 29 Working Party, Opinion 6/2014 on the Notion of Legitimate Interests of the Data Controller Under
Article 7 of Directive 95/46/EC (2014), p. 25. While the guidelines relate to the previous Directive, they also
provide guidance on the key elements of similar legitimate interest provisions included in the GDPR.
78
Recital 47 of the GDPR.
79
Processing that is just “useful” or “convenient” rather than “necessary” will not meet these requirements. P.
CAREY, DATA PROTECTION: A PRACTICAL GUIDE TO UK AND EU Law (5th ed., Oxford University Press, 2018),
50.
80
Opinion of Advocate General Bobek of 19 December 2018 in Case C‑40/17 (Fashion ID),
ECLI:EU:C:2018:1039, para. 122 (the notion of legitimate interests “appears to be rather elastic and openended”); Article 29 Working Party, supra note 77, p. 46.
81
Recitals 47–49 of the GDPR; Article 29 Working Party, supra note 77; Article 29 Data Protection Working
Party, Opinion 01/2017 on the Proposed Regulation for the ePrivacy Regulation (2002/58/EC), adopted 4 April
2017, p.7 (“Open-ended exceptions along the lines of Article 6 GDPR, and in particular Art. 6(f) GDPR (legitimate interest ground), should be avoided.”).
82
I. Chu Chao, How to sell customer data under the GDPR? Linkedin, https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/howsell-customer-data-under-gdpr-i-chu-chao
76
77

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3548444

16

The Competitive Consequences of the GDPR

2020

owner, and subject to that owner’s privacy policy.83 Whether such interpretations are
correct is a question for the European Data Protection Board84 and the courts to answer. At a minimum, it seems to us that data sharing with a third party should be
reasonably expected by data subjects.85
2. Ensuring Compliance of an External Data Provider with the GDPR
GDPR-imposed compliance responsibilities do not stop at an entity’s boundaries.
Rather, the GDPR imposes legal obligations on a data receiver to ensure compliance
with the GDPR by its external data suppliers, with regard to collection and data processing activities which pertain to the shared data.86
Given the importance of vetting costs in our analysis, let us elaborate on what
they might include. Some costs are direct—primarily the cost of reviewing the dataset
(e.g., what types of personal data it contains) and determining whether the data collection and use complies with GDPR requirements (e.g., how was it collected, what
consent was given, what privacy and security policies were put in place by the external
data provider). Interestingly, a new market has been created for performing such verifications.87 In addition, many firms appoint a Data Protection Officer (even in situations where this is not mandated by the GDPR) to ensure ongoing compliance and
education. Indirect costs include loss of the ability to use data which is non-GDPRcompliant or is based on consent requirements that cannot be met by the data receiver,
or the costs of differentiating personal data from other types of data.
The relative magnitude of these costs differs between different business models.
To illustrate, a merger requires one-time vetting, whereas periodic buying from an
external data supplier requires ongoing monitoring of compliance. Such costs are not
relevant to internal data collection or to the sharing of data-based knowledge. Accordingly, the more difficult or costly it is to ensure compliance of a data supplier, the
stronger the firm’s incentive to adopt those latter business models.
This requirement also has an indirect effect on market structure. To ensure that
the supply chain maintains robust privacy and security practices, compliance is often
built into the supply contract.88 From the point of view of the data supplier, the incentive to do business is limited by the costs of proving compliance, of enabling ongoing
monitoring of its activities, or of any sanctions imposed by the data receiver should it
be found in breach.
83

Chantal Bakermans, Selling a customer database: insolvency vs. privacy, https://penrose.law/en/selling-customer-database/
84
Under Article 70 of the GDPR, the EDPB is empowered to issue guidelines, recommendations and best practices on how to interpret and apply the GDPR, in order to promote a common understanding of European data
protection laws.
85
Recital 47 GDPR states that “[a]t any rate the existence of a legitimate interest would need careful assessment
including whether a data subject can reasonably expect at the time and in the context of the collection of the
personal data that processing for that purpose may take place. The interests and fundamental rights of the data
subject could in particular override the interest of the data controller where personal data are processed in circumstances where data subjects do not reasonably expect further processing.“
86
Articles 14 and 24 of the GDPR.
87
Sara H. Jodka, The GDPR and mergers and acquisitions: What corporate buyers and sellers need to know,
DICKINSON WRIGHT (April 2018).
88
See, e.g., Microsoft’s SSPA, supra note 60. While this example involves data processors, similar contractual
sanctions are often applied by data sellers.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3548444

3

Competitive Consequences of the GDPR

2020

3. Ensuring that Shared Access or Shared Data is Used in a GDPR-Compliant Way
In addition to the responsibility imposed on data receivers, the GDPR imposes
responsibility on data suppliers to ensure that the former meet the latter’s commitments towards the data subject with regard to any data shared. While such duties are
not specifically enumerated in the GDPR, they arise from the general principle according to which a data controller is liable towards the data subject to ensure that her
data is used only in accordance with her consent, including the right to request, at any
time, that the data be erased.89 While the specifics of this requirement are yet to be
determined by courts, it seems to us that at a minimum the data supplier must reasonably assume that the data receiver will comply with the GDPR with regard to any data
shared. Sharing thus increases the data supplier’s level of risk, as he may not have
control over the data receiver. The costs imposed by this requirement may include
ongoing monitoring, screening, and auditing of data-related activities performed by
the data receiver. The higher the risk of breach, the more stringent such actions need
to be. The risk of breach is further increased by the fact that combining the supplier’s
data with the receiver’s data might increase its sensitivity. Yet it might be difficult for
the data supplier to determine the extent of this risk, given that he may not be exposed
to the properties of the data receiver’s dataset. To reduce this risk, many firms engage
in due-diligence activities and apply contractual audits and sanctions in case of a
breach. Such costs are not relevant to internal collection or to mergers, but are highly
relevant to joint ventures and data sale transactions.
Liability goes even further. The Court of Justice recently held that a website operator is jointly liable with web technology providers operating on his site for breaches
by the latter of the GDPR, even if the website cannot control what personal data is
transmitted to or processed by the web technology provider.90 Resultantly, the risks
of sharing access to data are increased.
4. Data Management Requirements
Once data is collected and stored, the GDPR imposes further requirements on all
data controllers. For example, data must be accessed by the minimum number of personnel on a need-to-know and need-to-access basis; and data must be stored and processed for the minimum time and to the minimum degree required.91 Additional
89

An exception exists where the transfer was initiated by the data subject in accordance with his right to data
portability. Article 29 Working Party, Guidelines on the Right for “Data Portability” (as last revised and adopted
April 5, 2017), p.6: “Data controllers answering data portability requests... are not responsible for the processing
handled by the data subject or by another company receiving personal data.”
90
European Court of Justice, June 5, 2018, case C-210/16, ULD Schleswig
Holstein v. Wirtschaftsakademie Schleswig-Holstein ("Fan Page"); July 29, 2019, case C-40/17, Fashion ID v.
Verbraucherzentrale (joint controller responsibility between a website that used a Facebook Like button and
Facebook, with regard to those steps of the data processing that were jointly determined). Empirical studies
show that post-GDPR third-party tracking by small and medium firms has been reduced. Batikas et al., supra
note 10, and also sources cited there.
91
Articles 25(1) and 25(2) of the GDPR outline the organization’s obligations concerning data protection by
design and by default. This includes the implementation of appropriate technical and organisational measures
for ensuring that, by default, only personal data which are necessary for each specific purpose are processed. In

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3548444

18

The Competitive Consequences of the GDPR

2020

constraints and controls, including technical and physical limitations and organizational measures—e.g., non-disclosure agreements, permission management, training
and education, documentation, and so forth92—are imposed to ensure that data is not
misused or overly exposed.
Meeting these requirements may require costly internal (re)organization. One major cost relates to the need to create and monitor a system of data flow to manage the
data’s accessibility and use. Even within one entity, more than one system of data
flow might need to be set in place, for example where the consent of different data
subjects relates to different uses, and the data needs to be compartmentalized accordingly. Likewise, different uses of data that do not require access to the entire database
create a need for an internal technological architecture that can manage and facilitate
permissions for internal access to, transfer of, and use of different components of the
database. Such measures are needed to reduce the possibility of data breaches, including breaches that might enable the identification of data subjects through integration
of different components of a database.
Legally mandated data management processes exhibit economies of scale and
scope, which create a comparative advantage for large data controllers relative to
small ones. Costs can be shared through the creation of a joint data pool or a merger,
or completely avoided in the case of buying data-based knowledge.
Interestingly, market solutions are constantly being developed to both automate
GDPR-compliant data management processes and reduce their costs. For instance, the
use of Consent Platform Management (CMP) tools has become commonplace in
online markets, even in situations in which the use of such tools is not mandated by
the GDPR. CMP tools track and transfer information regarding the consent provided—or withdrawn—by each data subject for any purpose, and enable the data supplier, as well as the data receiver, to verify that the required consent was granted. Such
tools also reduce some of the liability risks identified previously.
5. Size-Dependent Legal Obligations
The characteristics of the database affect the imposition of additional constraints
on data processing and utilization. The larger the volume, variety, velocity, and veracity of the database, and the richer the knowledge that can be extracted from it, the
higher its commercial value. At the same time, the greater the chance that data can be
used to extract sensitive or identifying information about individuals, the stricter the
requirements imposed by the GDPR. In some cases, the sensitivity of the database, or
the scale of the data being processed or monitored, will trigger a requirement to appoint a Data Protection Officer.93 Likewise, companies are obliged to carry out a Data
Protection Impact Assessment any time a proposed data processing activity involves
particular, such measures shall ensure that by default personal data are not made accessible without the individual’s intervention to an indefinite number of natural persons.
92
Article 32(1) of the GDPR.
93
Article 37 of the GDPR lists the cases in which a Data Protection Officer (DPO) must be appointed: (a) the
controller is a public authority; (b) the core activities of the controller or the processor consist of processing
operations which, by virtue of their nature, their scope, and/or their purposes, require regular and systematic
monitoring of data subjects on a large scale; or (c) the core activities of the controller or the processor consist of
processing special categories of data on a large scale.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3548444

3

Competitive Consequences of the GDPR

2020

a high risk to privacy or data protection.94 In addition, the larger the number of entities95 and individuals that have access to the data, the higher the resultant data security
risks, and the stricter the requirement to mitigate such risks, including the adoption of
data security measures such as encryption, separation of data, and periodic audits.96
In short, data sensitivity and the potential for security breach are positively correlated
with the extent of required security measures, including anonymization and encryption. Some obligations are also correlated with the size of the firm. For instance, companies with fewer than two hundred and fifty employees are not required to keep
records unless their data processing is not incidental or involves sensitive information.97
These obligations affect all the business models except the last one, buying databased knowledge. All the other models assume that the firm wants or needs to increase
the size of its dataset. However, while these obligations affect the incentive to create
larger datasets, they are generally not prohibitive. Furthermore, putting in place a
more sophisticated data management system largely involves one-time costs, the main
exception being the appointment of a Data Protection Officer.
But more importantly, the magnitude of these obligations increases only up to the
point where the maximal requirements are applied (due to the dataset’s size and/or
sensitivity). Beyond that point, the marginal costs of meeting legal requirements
might fall due to economies of scale and scope. This, in turn, may benefit large firms
relative to medium-sized ones which must still comply with such requirements. Put
differently, the larger the firm, the lower its per-datum compliance costs, relative to
smaller firms which must also comply with similar requirements.

B. Effects on the Choice between Business Models
Let us now analyze the combined effects of the GDPR on the choice between
business models. To illustrate such effects, we analyze several stylized case studies
in increasing order of complexity. While the extent of the costs imposed by the GDPR
might differ from one factual scenario to another, general observations can be made.
Assume that Firm A requires a certain type of data for its operations, which can
be lawfully collected by it or by an external firm (Firm E).98 Absent technological,
strategic, and legal barriers to data collection and sharing, the choice of business
model will be based on the relative costs of internal versus external data collection.99
If the costs of internal collection by Firm A are lower than those of Firm E, Firm A
will collect the data internally; and vice versa: if Firm E can collect the relevant data
more cheaply and efficiently, or if it has already collected the data and has incurred
Article 35 of the GDPR; Milda Macenaite, The ‘Riskification’ of European Data Protection Law Through a
Two-Fold Shift, 8(3) EUROPEAN J. OF RISK REGULATION 506 (2017).
95
Including parts of the same business group.
96
Recital 83 of the GDPR defines the general principles behind security of processing: it must correlate with the
assessed risk to privacy based on the processing activities used and the personal data categories being processed.
97
Article 30 of the GDPR.
98
In our examples, both firms are data controllers. Of course, Firm A can also employ Firm E as a data processor,
to act on its behalf. Also, the choice is not dichotomous, as Firm A might choose to collect some of the necessary
data internally and buy other data from external controllers.
99
This stylized example assumes that the costs of collection also include some costs of processing the data.
94

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3548444

20

The Competitive Consequences of the GDPR

2020

the sunk costs involved, Firm A will buy the data from Firm E, thereby saving on data
collection costs and limiting duplication in collection.100
Let us now add the GDPR. Buying data from Firm E adds several types of costs
and obstacles. These include, inter alia, the costs incurred by Firm A for ensuring it
has a lawful basis for the use of the data. As noted above, a major obstacle may involve obtaining the consent of data subjects to an additional use of their data.101 Further costs are incurred by Firm A for vetting the compliance of Firm E with the GDPR
in collection and processing actions which pertain to the shared data. Furthermore,
acquiring an external dataset may require Firm A to reevaluate its own data life cycle
to ensure compliance. In addition, the GDPR imposes costs on Firm E, to ensure that
Firm A does not use the shared data in a way which was not agreed upon and which
infringes its obligations to its data subjects. These costs will be reflected in the price
charged by Firm E for the data. The greater the original data controller’s loss of control over the data, and the higher the risk of non-compliance, the higher such costs.
These obstacles and costs, in turn, limit the incentive of Firm A to buy data from
Firm E or to create a joint data pool. They might also reduce the number of data controllers competing over the supply of data. That is, if the costs of ensuring or demonstrating GDPR compliance are too high, some firms might choose not to engage in
data collection for the purpose of data sharing, thereby reducing the number of competitors in the market. These considerations imply that firm A will have fewer options
for buying the data from an external provider, thereby further strengthening incentives
for (otherwise inefficient) internal collection. This could also lead to more instances
of otherwise inefficient internal data collection, and to the multiplication of data collection efforts and costs.
Another potential option for obtaining the necessary data involves a merger between Firms A and E. Absent legal limitations, in the post-merger situation Firm A
could have used Firm E’s data internally. Yet, as elaborated above, the merging of
legal entities does not automatically imply that the merged entity can use data which
was collected by one entity prior to the merger. Rather, the parties must ensure that
such use meets the requirements for lawfulness under the GDPR. Furthermore, a merger requires vetting to ensure compliance of the target firm with the GDPR. Mergers
that would have otherwise been efficient might thus not be profitable or possible. Our
analysis comports with the study noted above, which indicated that more than half of
European dealmakers surveyed had worked on a merger that did not progress as a
result of concerns associated with the GDPR.102 This number is alarming, for the reasons elaborated below. While some of the reluctance to share data through mergers
might be temporary -until the market adjusts to the new law- many of the costs involved in data sharing are here to stay. The costs of a merger might, however, be
lower than the cost of continually buying new data from an external supplier. The

Given data’s non-rivalrous nature, Firm A might wish to limit Firm E’s ability to share the data with its
competitors, especially if such data enables them to enjoy economies of scale and scope. If it cannot do so, its
incentives to collect the data internally, to retain its comparative advantage, will be increased.
101
Of course, Firm A might have encountered similar obstacles if it chose to collect the same data internally.
Yet, as noted above, in some situations it might be more difficult to obtain consent for a secondary transfer of
the data.
102
Merrill Corporation, supra note 33.
100

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3548444

3

Competitive Consequences of the GDPR

2020

main difference is that a merger involves one-time verification of a basis for lawfulness and GDPR compliance, whereas continual buying requires ongoing monitoring
of an external supplier.
The legal data regime also affects considerations such as with whom to merge or
from whom to buy the data. All else being equal, Firm A will have stronger incentives
to merge with or to buy data from a firm which can be more quickly and inexpensively
vetted to ensure GDPR compliance. This, in turn, indirectly affects competition, as it
could create a comparative advantage for current data suppliers which have already
been vetted. Firm A might also prefer a known (reputable) data supplier over an unknown one, or one larger new data supplier over multiple smaller ones.
The above dynamics increase the costs of sharing data, whether through a simple
purchase transaction or through a merger or joint venture, and thereby strengthen incentives for internal collection of data even if an external firm can do so more efficiently or has already invested in data collection. In some (extreme) situations legal
compliance costs might also limit internal data collection, leading firms to forego
data-based activities altogether. In a survey of data protection professionals, one in
five respondents said that full GDPR compliance is impossible.103 Should the (real or
perceived) sanctions for such violations be sufficiently high, internal collection will
also be foregone.
The GDPR might also affect the breadth of a firm’s activities, products, and services. Limitations on data sharing between different entities could strengthen incentives to adopt a business model under which one company controls all products and
services in the relevant data ecosystem, especially where data constitutes an important
input and can be collected internally. In line with such benefits, Verizon adopted a
strategy of acquiring its data flow supply chain (AOL, Yahoo! and more) to better
control and utilize consumer data for targeted advertising and service enhancements,
similar to Google’s acquisition of DoubleClick and similar assets and technologies
involved in its ecosystem’s data flow.104 The greater the obstacles created by the legal
data regime to voluntary data sharing between separate entities, the stronger the incentives for such internal expansions.
The GDPR might also generate advantages for larger firms, thereby reducing potential competition.105 This is for several reasons. First, as noted above, large firms
enjoy economies of scale and scope in GDPR-compliant data collection and management.106 Recognizing this effect, the GDPR imposes more lenient requirements on
103

IAPP and Ernst & Young, Annual Governance Report 2018 (IAPP and Ernst & Young, 2018),
https://iapp.org/resources/article/iapp-ey-annual-governance-report-2018/.
104
Note, however, that these mergers preceded the GDPR.
105
Some indications for this effect already exist. See, e.g., Mark Scott, Laurens Cerulus, and Laura Kayali, “Six
Months in, Europe’s Privacy Revolution Favors Google, Face-book,” Politico, November 27, 2018,
https://www.politico.eu/article/gdpr-facebook-google-privacy-data-6-months-in-europes-privacy-revolutionfavors-google-facebook;. Wagner, supra note 8; Urban et al., Measuring the Impact of the GDPR on Data Sharing in Ad Networks, in PROCEEDINGS OF THE 15TH ACM ASIA CONFERENCE ON COMPUTER AND
COMMUNICATIONS SECURITY (2020).
106
Campbell et al., supra note 7, p. 48-9: “[R]ather than increasing competition, the nature of transaction costs
implied by [opt-in] privacy regulation suggests that privacy regulation may be anti-competitive….[I]n some
cases where entry had been profitable without regulation, [some firms] will choose not to enter.” Market statistics
provide empirical support for this effect with regard to digital advertising, at least in the short run. According to
Ghostery, following the introduction of the GDPR, Google’s tracking software appeared on slightly more websites, Facebook’s on 7% fewer, and the top 50 ad vendors (excluding Google and Facebook) appeared on 20%

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3548444

22

The Competitive Consequences of the GDPR

2020

small and medium firms. Yet in some situations such lower standards might disadvantage such firms relative to data suppliers which must meet the higher standards.
This might be the case when Firm A intends to integrate Firm E’s data with its own,
creating a large dataset which must comply with the stricter requirements. Firm A
might thus prefer to buy data which already complies with the higher standards.
Should the added value to Firm A of acquiring such data be significant, a small or
medium-sized Firm E might voluntarily choose to meet the higher standards, thereby
foregoing the main solution of the GDPR to the competitive disadvantages it creates
for small firms relative to large ones.107 Should the costs of compliance be prohibitive
for small firms, the number and even the quality of available data sources might be
reduced. It should be noted, however, that the growing development of GDPRcompliance tools, including legal-tech products for automating parts of the compliance process, some of which are open-source, help reduce such costs.
Second, some provisions of the GDPR create uncertainty, which may impose
higher costs on smaller players. To illustrate, while the GDPR recognizes a data subject’s right to data portability, and mandates that the data be transferred in a structured
and commonly used machine-readable format,108 it does not determine how data
should be transferred—for example, which technological standards should be applied
to ensure data portability and interoperability. A small player might be concerned that
once such standards are set, his costs of data transfer might be high. While this concern affects large players as well, they enjoy two comparative advantages. First, compliance with the standard might be subject to economies of scale, as any costs will be
spread over more data. Second, in the absence of governmental facilitation, standards
for data operability and interoperability might be set by the large players, which would
cater to their own preferences,109 including raising the compliance costs of their
smaller rivals. The absence of standards for organizing a dataset might also increase
technological barriers to data interoperability between willing contractual parties.110
Additional forms of uncertainty which could create a comparative advantage for those
with significant resources relates to the boundaries of lawfulness for data use, elaborated above, as well as the exact territorial scope of the GDPR.111
Third, uncertainty with regard to the correct interpretation of the GDPR could
lead to strategic use of interpretation as an offensive tactic. Following the introduction
of the GDPR, some large technology firms limited some of their previous sharing
practices. Some commentators argue that these limitations go far beyond what is
needed to comply with the GDPR, and thus appear to be used strategically.112 Geradin
and Katsifis, for example, argue that Google’s recent limitations on the transfer of
fewer, while the smallest companies suffered a 32% drop. Greg Ip, Beware of the Big Tech Backlash, WALL
STREET JOURNAL, Dec. 19, 2018.
107
See discussion of the Commission’s Impact Assessment, infra.
108
Recital 68 and Article 20 of the GDPR.
109
Gal and Rubinfeld, supra note 38.
110
Ibid.
111
Batikas et al., supra note 10; Oisin Tobin at al., GDPR: 3 Areas of Ambiguity, 20(2) PRIVACY & DATA
PROTECTION 15 (2019).
112
For a list of Google policy changes which it justified on the basis of privacy considerations see J. Hercher,
How We Got Here: A Look Back At The Privacy Changes That Reshaped Google, ADEXCHANGER, 7 October
2019, available at https://adexchanger.com/online-advertising/how-we-got-here-a-look-back-at-the-privacychanges-that-reshaped-google/

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3548444

3

Competitive Consequences of the GDPR

2020

data relating to bids for advertising space could deliver a fatal blow to the market in
header bidding (advance bidding on online display ads), since publishers will no
longer be able to measure and analyze the incremental value brought by header bidding partners compared to Google-controlled channels. They further claim that, to the
extent that Google relies on privacy concerns to justify its policy, the GDPR does not
provide such justification.113
Fourth, a firm’s size, as well as its reputation, may affect the conduct of data
subjects. So far, our analysis has largely focused on the incentives of data controllers.
But data subjects’ willingness to allow firms to collect their data also affects the dynamics of data markets. The GDPR does not directly affect data subjects’ choices,
except to ensure that they have more information and control over their data. But the
increased sensitivity to privacy and human dignity concerns that surrounded its adoption might have such effects. This is because firms which have large datasets might
be able to make a more credible commitment to their users that they will follow the
GDPR. There are two reasons for this. First, it is rational to assume that those who
own large datasets will be monitored more closely by regulators and by their data
subjects.114 Second, firms with high-value datasets will generally have much more to
lose if they do not comply with the GDPR than firms with low-value datasets. Similarly, the more important personal data is to one’s business model, the larger his potential loss. This is not only because of the size of fines imposed, but, more
importantly, because non-compliance could create a backlash among users, at least
where they have reasonable alternatives. Users might therefore prefer to engage with
firms that have more to lose. This dynamic is similar to that which applies to data
security issues, and is strengthened by it. While large technology companies are not
immune to hacking, they have strong incentives and hefty funding to erect barriers to
hackers and to immediately correct any failures. Accordingly, if the user can choose
from several services which are relatively similar, especially if they do not compete
on price and/or if non-price aspects are not easily verifiable and quantifiable by the
user, the services of large, reputable firms may be preferred.115 This, in turn, will create barriers to data collection by small or new firms, and further enlarge the datasets
of large data controllers. While the GDPR attempts to limit such dynamics by increasing trust that data will be handled by all market participants in ways which protect
privacy, as elaborated below. As of yet trust has not increased in the post-GDPR period.116 In addition, users might also prefer to limit the number of firms to which they
grant consent, thereby sticking with a firm to which they have already granted consent
for data collection, thereby further strengthening large incumbents.117
The analysis so far has implicitly assumed that the data which can potentially be
collected by Firm A and Firm E is interchangeable. Let us now focus on a case in
which data synergies exist between the datasets of Firm A and Firm E, such that the
Damien Geradin and Dimitrios Katsifis, ‘Trust me, I’m fair’: Analysing Google’s Latest Practices in Ad Tech
from the Perspective of EU Competition Law (2019).
114
The GDPR empowers data subjects to enforce their rights even without court proceedings. Articles 57, 78–
80 of the GDPR.
115
This effect may be tempered, at least with regard to some large technology firms, by surveillance capitalism
concerns.
116
See discussion infra.
117
Roslyn Layton, 10 Problems with the GDPR, Written Testimony, in Senate Hearings, supra note 11.
113

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3548444

24

2020

The Competitive Consequences of the GDPR

quality of the information and insights that can be extracted from the combined dataset is significantly greater than that which can be extracted from either alone. Such
data synergies can be realized through buying the data, creating a joint venture, or
through merger. The legal data regime does not apply different rules to scenarios in
which data synergies can be realized and those in which they cannot. Realizing data
synergies might, however, involve additional costs and risks relative to simply using
an externally created database. For example, as elaborated above, should Firm A combine internal and external datasets which apply different privacy policies, Firm A may
need to redesign its internal data flow architecture and its internal policies relating,
inter alia, to issues such as who can see what, what data can be used for what purposes,
how data is housed and for how long, or what data should be destroyed or separated.118
Data synergies could also affect the extent of applicable legal requirements. For instance, the newly created combined dataset might include more sensitive data, requiring the firm to meet higher standards for its protection. In extreme cases data which
is overly sensitive may be intentionally excluded from data transfers, anonymized or
aggregated.119 The combined dataset might also trigger a requirement to appoint a
Data Protection Officer and to conduct a Data Protection Impact Assessment.120
Table 1 displays the main costs and benefits of the different business models
which involve actual data (rather than data-based information), as affected by the
GDPR.
Business model / Internal collection
Merger
Costs and benefits121
Extending the use of
Yes
Yes
the data
Compliance costs
Intermediate
Intermediate
imposed on data user
(one-time)
Risk of non-compliance
by third party that cannot
be easily detected
Enabling data synergies

Duplication of direct
collection

Low

Partial (only if
data can be
collected)
Yes

Low to
intermediate
Yes

No

Buying data
Yes

Joint
venture
Yes

High
(ongoing)

High
(ongoing)

High

High

Partial (if allowed
to sell or share)
No

Yes

No

Table 1: Main costs and benefits of business models which involve actual data
To summarize the findings of this chapter, the GDPR affects the choices firms
make with regard to the source of their data. By imposing high hurdles on data shar-

118

Darren Abernethy, Privacy and Data Security in Mergers & Acquisitions, Linkedin, October 20, 2017,
https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/privacy-data-security-mergers-acquisitions-esq-fip-cipp-t-e-a-m
119
Ibid.
120
See supra, footnote 93.
121
The comparison is based on the assumption that the datasets created are similar, so that monitoring and security costs are similar.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3548444

3

Competitive Consequences of the GDPR

2020

ing, the GDPR strengthens incentives for firms to collect data internally, where feasible, or to buy data-based knowledge if such is sufficient for their needs. It also bestows
comparative advantages on large data controllers relative to small ones.

IV. POTENTIAL LEGAL AND TECHNOLOGICAL SOLUTIONS
Before analyzing the welfare effects created by the above dynamics, we explore
whether the obligations imposed by the GDPR can be overcome based on legal obligations to share data, or by technological means.
A. Legal Obligations to Share Data
The legal data regime includes obligations for the sharing of data between certain
entities, with the aim of reducing access barriers to data in some situations. A prime
example is incorporated in the GDPR itself.122 The right to data portability123 mandates that data controllers transfer any data they control with respect to a specific data
subject, in accordance with the data subject’s request that they do so.124
In practice, this right is quite limited in its competitive effects. Specifically, it
requires that each data subject actively request transfer of his data to another entity.
This creates hurdles to the transfer of large quantities of data pertaining to different
data subjects, and certainly of whole databases, thereby potentially limiting the ability
of the data receiver to enjoy economies of scale and scope in data analysis.
Competition law imposes an obligation to share data in a very limited set of circumstances, in which such sharing is essential for the competitive process. 125 Under
the essential facilities doctrine, which forms part of the duty to deal imposed on dominant firms, in exceptional circumstances a dominant undertaking might be mandated
to grant access to an input which it controls, and which is indispensable for carrying
on a certain business. In IMS Health126 the Court stated that such exceptional circumstances exist where the refusal prevents the emergence of a new product for which
there is potential consumer demand, it is unjustified, and it excludes any competition
within a secondary market. Later cases, including Microsoft, relaxed the requirement
for the emergence of a new product.127
Significant differences exist between sharing obligations imposed by competition
law and those mandated through the GDPR. The values protected are partially different:128 the GDPR’s right to data portability is based mainly on the data subject’s ownership of his personal data, while competition law serves to protect and facilitate
competition and its outcomes. Also, the initiator of the mandatory transfer differs:

122

A comparable right exists with regard to specific types of data or specific industries, a prime example being
the fintech industry.
123
Article 20 and recital 68 of the GDPR.
124
Article 20(1) of the GDPR.
125
For an excellent analysis of this right see Graef, supra note 72; Niamh Dunne, Dispensing with Indispensability (2019), available at https://ssrn.com/abstract=3476938.
126
IMS Health GmbH & Co. OHG v. NDC Health GmbH & Co. KG, C-418/01, ECLI:EU:C:2004:257.
127
Case COMP/C-3/37.792 - Microsoft, 24 March 2004.
128
Graef, supra note 72.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3548444

26

The Competitive Consequences of the GDPR

2020

while under the GDPR the initiator is the data subject, under competition law it is a
competition authority or a court.
In rare cases an obligation to share data has been imposed in order to advance
competition. A known example involves the decision of the French Autorité de la
Concurrence in GDF Suez.129 There, the dominant firm enjoyed a data-based advantage which derived from its previous exclusive access to data on customers obtained within the framework of its former government-created monopoly status. It
was ordered to give competing market players access to certain data about its customers (e.g., names, addresses, telephone numbers and consumption profiles), which was
deemed essential to enable rivals to compete effectively with it.
Mandatory data sharing through competition law is, however, very limited, for
two reasons. First, the conditions for mandatory data sharing are hard to meet. Given
that data is often available and non-rivalrous, a competitor might be able to collect
similar or comparable data, which could lead to similar predictions. Accordingly, not
granting access to data will generally not create a “complete foreclosure of downstream competition” or stifle a “new product” or innovation, as required by the case
law.130 Observe, however, that mandatory data sharing could also be imposed as a
remedy, in order to restore competition that has been compromised because of illegal
practices by the dominant undertaking.131 In such cases, the requirements might be
more flexible.
Second, competition law regulators have emphasized, time and again, that competition law considerations apply in parallel to data protection considerations, and do
not override them. For example, in its Microsoft/LinkedIn merger decision, pertaining
to the ability of the two firms to combine their datasets, the European Commission
clearly stated that any data transfers between the merging entities must also meet the
conditions set out in the GDPR.132 A similar policy is likely to apply to essential facility cases. Given that sharing personally identifiable information—even if it is essential for competition—without a legal basis under the GDPR would impinge the
fundamental right to privacy,133 it is difficult to believe that competition law will take
precedence over such rights where a direct clash exists.
At the same time, the fact that one of the bases for data processing under the
GDPR involves a legal obligation to process personal data134 might serve as a tool for
reaching a more nuanced and welfare-increasing balance between the two sets of con-

129

Autorité de la Concurrence, Décision 14-MC-02 du 9 Septembre 2014 Relative à une Demande de Mesures
Conservatoires Présentée par la Société Direct Energie dans les Secteurs du Gaz et de l’Electricité, paras 169174, available at http://www.autoritedelaconcurrence.fr /pdf/avis/14mc02.pdf. For a relatively similar Belgian
case see Kathuria and Globocnik, supra note 68.
130
Graef, supra note 72; Kathuria and Globocnik, ibid.
131
Kathuria and Globocnik, ibid.
132
COMP/M.8124 – Microsoft/LinkedIn, para. 167: “Microsoft is subject to European data protection laws
which limit its ability to undertake any treatment of LinkedIn full data...the Commission notes that the newly
adopted GDPR... may further limit Microsoft's ability to undertake any treatment of LinkedIn full data by
strengthening the existing rights and empowering individuals with more control over their personal data (i.e.
easier access to personal data; right to data portability; etc.).” See also COMP/M.8180 – VERIZON/YAHOO,
para. 80 et seq. (any combination of the said datasets could only be implemented to the extent allowed by applicable data protection rules); COMP/M.8251 BITE/TELE2/TELIA LIETUVA/JV, para. 85 et seq.
133
Article 8 of the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights.
134
Article 6(1)(c) of the GDPR.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3548444

3

Competitive Consequences of the GDPR

2020

siderations, especially with regard to the use of more lenient procedures for data sharing. An interesting example involves the GDF Suez case, noted above. GDF Suez was
ordered to notify customers about the sharing of their personal data with third parties,
and to give them the option of opting out within 30 days. The case was dealt with
under the 1995 Directive, under which the requirements for consent were more lenient. While an opt-out mechanism would most likely not be captured under the stricter
requirements of the GDPR, in which consent must be explicit and involve an affirmative action,135 it remains to be seen whether such an opt-out scheme might be legitimate under the legal obligation to process personal data.136
Accordingly, both the GDPR’s right to data portability and competition law’s
refusal to deal generally do not significantly affect the choice between business models for obtaining relevant data.

B. Technological Solutions
The choices firms make between the business models are also affected by the
technological tools which are available to overcome privacy-based limitations to data
sharing. The major tool which can be applied in all five business models, involves
data anonymization in ways that make it unreasonable that a third party could deanonymize the data and identify the data subject or any association with him. In accordance with the European Commission, “personal data that has been rendered irreversibly anonymous in such a way that the individual is no longer identifiable, is not
considered to be personal data and thus not governed by the GDPR.”137 Algorithms
or other tools that can perform irreversible anonymization are already employed, and
in some instances their use is mandated by the GDPR.138 The market for such algorithms and tools is constantly developing. Some algorithms change the content of the
database in such a way that anonymization is ensured, yet any analytics performed on
the dataset as a whole are similar to those that would be applied to the original dataset.
Others offer tools which make data harder to de-anonymize. Yet complete anonymization is often technically difficult, and sometimes impossible.139
This technological solution suffers, however, from several major downsides.
First, in many situations data loses much of its value in the absence of personal details
about the data subject. For example, the less is known about the preferences of the
135

Kathuria and Globocnik, supra note 68.
Graef argues that such measures may fall under the legal obligation exception. Graef, supra, note 72, at, 319.
For a different view see Kathuria and Globocnik, ibid, at 21 and sources cited there, relying, inter alia, on Recital
45 of the GDPR, which requires that the legal obligation be grounded in legislation.
137
European Commission, The GDPR: New Opportunities, New Obligations (Luxembourg: Publications Office
of the European Union, 2018), p. 5, https://ec.europa.eu/commission/sites/beta-political/files/data-protectionfactsheet-sme-obligations_en.pdf
138
The GDPR requires controllers to use pseudonymization and anonymization when processing personal information. Recital 26 of the GDPR defines anonymized data as “data rendered anonymous in such a way that the
data subject is not or no longer identifiable.” Data anonymization is a higher bar of security than pseudonymization. Recital 83 of the GDPR mentions encryption as additional security measure which is required to mitigate
high risks from data processing activity. Encryption on top of pseudonymization or anonymization carries additional costs in monetary terms and in opportunities to utilize the data.
139
See, e.g., Article 29 Working Party, Opinion 05/2014 on Anonymisation Techniques, WP 216, 10 April 2014;
S. E Fienberg, A. Rinaldo, and X. Yang, Differential Privacy and the Risk-Utility Tradeoff for Multi-Dimensional Contingency Tables, in PRIVACY IN STATISTICAL DATABASES (Springer, 2010), pp. 187–199.
136

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3548444

28

The Competitive Consequences of the GDPR

2020

data subject, the lower the quality of the match between those preferences and the
personalized products directed at that user. This may reduce the firm’s profits and
potentially even the user’s welfare.140 Second, such solutions limit the possibility of
creating data synergies resulting from the direct combination of two or more datasets,
rather than combining the meta-knowledge resulting from them. Finally, the acts of
anonymizing and categorizing constitute a form of processing of personal data in
themselves and therefore must comply with all the relevant requirements.141 Accordingly, in most situations anonymization solutions do not constitute a viable tool for
completely or cost-effectively overcoming GDPR’s constraints on data collection and
sharing.

V. POTENTIAL EFFECTS ON COMPETITION AND WELFARE
Why should we care if the legal data regime affects business models for data
collection and limits data sharing? We suggest several cumulative answers to this
question. First and foremost, legal limitations could prevent the realization of data
synergies between databases controlled by different entities. In a world with many
distributed databases, such limitations may significantly weaken the ability to mine
knowledge from data.142 To illustrate, consider medical data on patients’ responses to
a treatment for a rare disease. Unless data from different controllers are combined into
a coherent dataset, doctors will be deprived of means to reach a better understanding
of how to treat the disease, for example by learning about unexpected interactions
between different compounds. Legal limitations on data sharing could thus prevent
the emergence of better data-based products or services, and could reduce firms’ ability to develop and fine-tune new algorithms, which might increase productive and
dynamic efficiency in a wide array of markets through processes such as transfer
learning.143 These disadvantages are likely to be aggravated to the extent that geographic limitations on data storage erect additional obstacles to the realization of data
synergies. It is thus not surprising that barriers to data portability and interoperability
between firms have been identified as major impediments to the efficient operation of
our data-based economy.144
Second, legal limitations on data collection, processing and use could prevent
firms from obtaining the data necessary for their operations. Assume that Firm A
cannot collect all the types of data it needs, or that such collection is not cost-effective.
As elaborated by Rubinfeld and Gal, this might be the case where data collection is a
side-effect of a costly action (e.g., operating a successful social network), where data
is historical (e.g., data about a data subject’s past actions), or where data relates to a
140

For an overview of benefits and costs of better matching see, e.g., Acquisiti et al., supra note 13.
Graef, supra note 72. Article 5 of the GDPR is applicable.
See, e.g., OECD, supra note 40, at 29; Gal and Rubinfeld, supra note 38.
143
Cockburn et al., supra note 52 (relating to transfer learning). For an early argument regarding the costs of
opt-in privacy mechanisms see Michael E. Staten & Fred H. Cate, The Impact of Opt-In Privacy Rules on Retail
Credit Markets: A Case Study of MBNA, 52 DUKE LAW JOURNAL 745 (2003).
144
DIRECTORATE-GEN. OF COMMC’NS NETWORKS, CONTENT & TECH., EUR. COMM’N, STUDY ON EMERGING
ISSUES OF DATA OWNERSHIP, INTEROPERABILITY, (RE-)USABILITY AND ACCESS TO DATA, AND LIABILITY 292–
93 (2018), https://www.wik.org/fileadmin/Studien/2018/EU_Data_ownership_en.pdf, at 15-16, 88; Oscar Borgogno & Giuseppe Colangelo, Data Sharing and Interoperability: Fostering Competition Through APIs
(2018)(on file with author).
141
142

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3548444

3

Competitive Consequences of the GDPR

2020

unique activity which cannot be externally observed (such as data collected on reactions to a certain event which is internal to a social media firm).145 To engage in its
data-based activity, Firm A must therefore obtain the relevant data from Firm E. If
obstacles to data sharing are too high, Firm A will not be able to obtain the relevant
data, or sufficient data in order to enjoy economies of scale and scope in data analysis.
Legal obstacles to internal data processing and use would have a similar effect. 146 In
addition, as Layton argues, the need to state at time of data collection the purpose of
its use harms the ability to use machine learning techniques to glean from the data
unanticipated learnings.147 The ultimate outcome is further reductions in the availability of data-based products and services.148
Some researchers suggest a mitigating dynamic which might enable firms to more
easily collect data: by reassuring potential users that their data will be safe, data protection legislation promotes the use of information technology.149 However, the size
of this effect is questionable. A survey administered by researchers at the University
of Amsterdam just after the GDPR came into force found that only 1% of 500 respondents had changed their settings and narrowed their consent for the use of their
data by any firm.150 Accordingly, despite the public atmosphere surrounding the adoption of the GDPR, which emphasized the possible harms arising from breaches of
privacy, and despite the fact that the legislation made it easy for users to change their
consent boundaries by requiring data controllers to actively give each user this option,
the new regulation has not necessarily brought about a significant change in users’
conduct with regard to their privacy, emphasizing, once again, what some call the
privacy paradox.151 Of course, the GDPR includes additional mandatory privacy-protection mechanisms, but the breadth of consent given by users nonetheless significantly affects what can be done with their data. Furthermore, it is unclear whether the
existence of the GDPR provides the reassurance claimed by its proponents: a study
conducted by the European Commission in March 2019, more than a year after the
145

Rubinfeld and Gal, supra note 51.
Campbell et al.. supra note 7; Jian, Jin and Wagman, supra note 34, p.4 (such obstacles may also arise from
uncertainty in the regulation).
147
Layton, supra note 117, p. 6 (pointing to a comprehensive study on the connection between the use of mobile
phones and brain cancer, which made use of data which was not specifically collected for this purpose.)
148
On the connection between privacy and innovation see, e,g., Avi Goldfarb and Catherine Tucker, Privacy
and Innovation, in INNOVATION POLICY AND THE ECONOMY (Josh Lerner and Scott Stern eds., 2012), , Volume
12, p. 65; Silvana Krasteva et al., The 80/20 Rule: Corporate Support for Innovation by Employees, 38 INT. J.
INDUS. ORG. 32 (2015) (Privacy compliance costs deter innovation and shift some of it into established firms).
149
Acquisiti et al., supra note 13. This is part of the logic on which the GDPR is based. The size of this effect
may very depending on the types of data involved. See, e.g., I. Adjerid, et al.,The Impact of Privacy Regulation
and Technology Incentives: The case of Health Information Exchanges," 62(4) MANAGEMENT SCIENCE 1042
(2016)(more privacy of health information increases willingness to provide such data).
150
Based on discussions with Prof. Balazs Bodo from the University of Amsterdam. Researches have shown that
users have a strong tendency to stick with default privacy settings, even when they understand the potential
harms involved. See, e.g., Lior J. Strahilevitz & Matthew B. Kugler, Is Privacy Policy Language Irrelevant to
Consumers?, 45 J. LEG. STUD. 569 (2016); Adam S. Chilton & Omri Ben-Shahar, Simplification of Privacy
Disclosures: An Experimental Test, 45 J. LEG. STUD. 41 (2016); Jane Bambauer et al., A Bad Education, 2017
IL. L. REV. 109 (2017).
151
The privacy paradox is the discrepancy between individuals’ declared attitudes (concerns about threats to
their online privacy) and their actual behavior (freely disclosing personal data online). See, e.g., Susanne Barth
and Menno D. T. Jong, The Privacy Paradox – Investigating Discrepancies Between Expressed Privacy Concerns And Actual Online Behavior – A Systematic Literature Review, 34(7) TELEMATICS AND INFORMATICS
1038 (2017).
146

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3548444

30

The Competitive Consequences of the GDPR

2020

GDPR came into force, found that 81% of Europeans who reported providing data
online still said they felt they had no control or only partial control over their data.152
Accordingly, the effects of this mitigating factor do not currently seem sufficiently
strong to increase competition in the market. It remains to be seen whether this will
still be the case once users are better educated regarding their ability to control their
data, and once significant enforcement actions are undertaken and made public.
Third, limitations on data sharing may reduce competition and lead to more concentrated market structures.153 Two dynamics are at play here. First, as elaborated
above, the GDPR creates some comparative advantages for large firms in meeting
GDPR requirements.154 Second, limitations on data collection and sharing reduce the
potential for the emergence of a competitive and distributed data collection ecosystem. To illustrate this point, compare two scenarios. Under the first, data sharing is
relatively easy. This increases the incentives of firms to collect data. As a result, the
market for data may become more competitive. Furthermore, the increased ability of
firms to integrate different datasets reduces the need to rely on one source for data,
either internal or external, thereby lowering the price for data.155 Under the second
scenario, high obstacles to data sharing reduce the ability and incentives of some data
controllers to enter or operate in the market. A potential indication of this effect can
be found in the fact that some foreign firms have exited European markets in order to
avoid being subject to the GDPR,156 or that the number of small and medium sized
competitors in some digital markets was significantly reduced,157 thereby reducing
potential competition. While some firms may return once the dust has settled on the
implications of GDPR compliance, some may not.
The above dynamics, in turn, could strengthen one of the main concerns raised in
digital markets: the fact that some entities enjoy significant and durable market power
based largely on their control of vast amounts of data.158 The comparative advantages
enjoyed by such firms are partly based on economies of scale and scope in data collection and analysis, and on network effects.159 Other firms, which lack such a variety
and volume of data sources, may find it difficult to match these capabilities, especially
where first-mover advantages and switching costs are high.160 This difficulty may be
overcome if the competitor could combine data collected by numerous sources. And
152

European Commission, Special Eurobarometer 487a, The General Data Protection Regulation (June 2019),
http://ec.europa.eu/commfrontoffice/publicopinion/index.cfm/survey/getsurveydetail/instruments/special/surveyky/2222. It also found that “at a country level there is no consistent relationship between awareness of GDPR
and the level of control respondents feel they have over the personal information they post online.”
153
This paragraph and the next largely build on Gal and Rubinfeld, supra note 38.
154
For an empirical study see Batikas et al., supra note 10.
155
For the tradeoffs between internal and external relationships in interconnections see Ronald H. Coase, The
Nature of the Firm, 4 ECONOMICA 386, 394–95 (1937).
156
Alec Stapp, GDPR After One Year: Costs and Unintended Consequences, TRUTH ON THE MARKET, 24 May
2019 https://truthonthemarket.com/2019/05/24/gdpr-after-one-year-costs-and-unintended-consequences/; Layton, supra note 117, p. 3-6 (“No longer visible in the EU are more than 1,000 American news and media outlets,
in addition to many sites for ecommerce, games, information technology, and other services.” This also indirectly
affects free speech and democracy).
157
Layton, ibid.
158
See, e.g., OECD, supra note 40, at 7; John M Newman, Antitrust in Digital Markets (June 22, 2018),
https://ssrn.com/astract=3201004.
159
STUCKE & GRUNES, supra note 42; Howard A. Shelanski, Information, Innovation, and Competition Policy
for the Internet, 161 U. PA. L. REV. 1663, 1679 (2013).
160
Id.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3548444

3

Competitive Consequences of the GDPR

2020

since data is non-rivalrous and often easily replicable, data controllers could potentially share their data with many users, thereby strengthening competition even further. Yet if firms encounter high hurdles to combining data collected by external
sources, they may not be able to enjoy economies of scale to the same extent as established rivals.161 This, in turn, could entrench market power and raise the risk of
monopolization.162
Finally, European firms’ international competitiveness might be negatively affected.163 Leading in artificial intelligence-based products and services requires more
and higher-quality data from which algorithms can learn. Accordingly, even when
data collected in one country is not relevant to consumers in another, limitations on
data sharing and synergies could reduce the ability of domestic firms to create better
algorithms, and could impede transfer learning and its application to foreign data. The
concern for competitiveness is strengthened by the fact that some governments have
started to invest in creating ecosystems for data-driven advantages. China, in particular, has begun seeking to create such advantages for its domestic firms by, inter alia,
motivating the creation of huge, comprehensive databases in areas where big data is
considered to be of utmost importance (e.g., medical devices, autonomous cars, smart
cities).164 Moreover, stricter limitations on data sharing with foreign entities and geographic limitations on data storage165 affect the incentives of foreign entities to engage
in data sharing with European firms, thereby potentially creating opportunity costs
resulting from foregone business opportunities. Opportunity costs could also arise
from the employment of system engineers to ensure GDPR compliance.
Accordingly, while privacy protection is of utmost importance for ensuring the
well-being of European citizens, more thought should be given to its side effects and
to designing welfare-enhancing balances between the competing considerations. In
this regard, we emphasize once again that while the costs of putting a GDPR compliance system in place are short-term, other limitations imposed by the GDPR are longterm. Accordingly, while in the future we may see more data-sharing deals and more
entry than in the current adjustment phase, most of the dynamics identified in this
article reflect ongoing compliance with GDPR requirements, and so are here to stay.
Interestingly, the European Commission’s own Impact Assessment on the GDPR,
published in early 2012, concluded that while the GDPR would impose limited costs
(mainly for the employment of a data protection officer, where relevant, and the introduction of a general obligation to demonstrate compliance, which was estimated to
161

Id. at 166.
For the risks of entrenchment of market power resulting from opt-in privacy consent mechanisms see Campbell et al., supra note 7, p. 68 (“privacy regulation can shield a large, general incumbent from potential competition because regulation raises the threshold quality and scope for profitable entry by a challenger…. This is
more likely for relatively strong incumbents: the stronger the incumbent, the better the marginal entrant must
be”).
163
For a similar argument with regard to data standardization see Gal and Rubinfeld, supra note 38.
164
Cheng Yu and Ma Si, Industrial Internet to Boost Smart Manufacturing, CHINA DAILY (Dec. 1, 2017, 7:35
AM), http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/business/tech/2017-12/01/content_35148829.htm.
165
Recital 101 and Article 45 of the GDPR. For instance, geographic limitations on data storage may erect
barriers to international transfers of data which might be needed in order to create a joint dataset (e.g., on patients’
reactions to a specific treatment) that includes data on data subjects from EU and third countries/foreign firms
which have not received the required EU approval. In some instances such barriers can be (partially) overcome
by storing the relevant data in the respective countries and querying the different datasets separately.
162

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3548444

32

The Competitive Consequences of the GDPR

2020

impose “some additional” administrative burdens), it would also strengthen competition overall, and would support the competitiveness of EU firms in numerous ways.166
These were expected to include lowering the costs of compliance with privacy requirements by replacing then-existing EU data protection laws with a clear, simple
regime and consistent and effective enforcement, and facilitating business by increasing consumer trust.167 With regard to its impact on innovation, it was concluded that
increased consumer trust under the GDPR would also increase the uptake of new
technologies, with the result that European industries could become world leaders in
privacy-enhancing technologies or privacy-by-design solutions.168 Addressing industry concerns regarding the administrative and financial costs of implementing some
of the proposed changes, the Impact Assessment emphasized that some of the
GDPR’s legal obligations would not be imposed on small firms.169
The Commission’s Impact Assessment disregards important factors such as the
effects of the GDPR on the ability of firms to enjoy data-based advantages by way of
data synergies and economies of scale and scope in data analysis, which may significantly affect competition and innovation. One of the reasons for this truncated assessment was that it focused on comparing the GDPR to the previous privacy directive,
adopted in 1995. Accordingly, the GDPR’s overall impact on internal competition
and international competitiveness in a digital environment was not evaluated. This is
unfortunate, as the analysis disregards important aspects of the GDPR’s effects on the
operation of data-based markets. Accordingly, while the GDPR might indeed increase
the competitiveness of European firms in privacy-enhancing technologies—the only
market the Impact Assessment directly relates to with regard to comparative advantages of European firms—this is an extremely small part of all the product and
service markets affected by the GDPR. Recognizing such effects might have led to a
more rigorous discussion of the inherent tension between data-based innovation and
data protection, and to the incorporation of some solutions. Furthermore, even within
the limited framework adopted by the Commission for its analysis, the impact of the
change in the legal regime on the ability of firms to realize data-based advantages
should have been analyzed. This is because the GDPR, while introducing muchneeded clarity and harmonization into data protection, also significantly increased the
costs and difficulty of data collection and sharing due to its scope of prohibitions,
sanctions, and enforcement mechanisms, thereby significantly affecting competition
and innovation.
Finally, let us relate to the argument that introducing more competition implies
that personal data will be held by more market players, and that realizing data synergies might increase the quality of information regarding data subjects held by such
players. Yet the justifications for the GDPR do not aim at preventing wider use of
data, but rather attempt to give users more control over their personal data. Moreover,

166

Commission Staff Working Paper, Impact Assessment Accompanying the GDPR, SEC(2012)72 final, 25 January 2012, see in particular annex 10 on the Impacts of the Preferred Option on
Competitiveness.
167
Ibid., p. 150
168
Id.
169
Id.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3548444

3

Competitive Consequences of the GDPR

2020

the fact that more firms hold more or better personal information does not automatically imply harm to well-being. Rather, much depends on the use of such information.
Many uses of private information may significantly increase well-being.170 But more
importantly, the question is whether we prefer that a few very large firms hold such
information, or that more firms have access to such information and compete over
data-based advantages. In line with economic teachings, in most cases competition
can bring about benefits to users, including stricter self-imposed obligations on how
the data owner will use the data. Competition will reduce the ability of large and diversified firms to use their market power and market position to obtain user consent.171

VI. CONCLUSION AND THE WAY FORWARD
The GDPR is the Magna Carta of data protection, the importance of which cannot
be overstated. Data protection creates an inherent clash with competing values, most
importantly the potential loss of benefits from better data-based knowledge.172 To
balance these tradeoffs, the GDPR does not prohibit data collection or sharing. Rather,
it provides mechanisms for control, accountability and liability over data collection,
processing and use, by combining individual rights with systemic governance.173
Yet, as this article shows, the price of data protection through the GDPR is much
higher than previously recognized.174 As elaborated, the GDPR has two main harmful
effects: it limits competition in data markets, creating more concentrated market structures and entrenching the market power of those who are already strong; and it limits
data synergies, thereby preventing the creation of some data-based knowledge. Such
effects belie the confidence expressed by European Commissioner for Justice, Consumers and Gender Equality Věra Jourová, according to whom “the big guys increasing market share? I don’t believe [the GDPR] will have such a consequence.”175
In a world where “those that know how to use [data] have a decisive competitive
advantage... through raising performance, offering more user-centric products and
services, fostering innovation,”176 and where the battlefield over data-based ad-

170

For such a suggestion see Goldfarb and Tucker, supra note 148. For an example of undeniable benefits see
A. R. Miller and Catherine Tucker, Can Healthcare Information Technology Save Babies? 119(2) JOURNAL OF
POLITICAL ECONOMY 289 (2011)(privacy protections are associated with 320 annual deaths of US-born babies);
Jin-Hyuk Kim & Liad Wagman, Screening Incentives and Privacy Protection in Financial Markets: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis, 46 RAND J. OF ECON. 1 (2015)(loan applicants in counties in the San Francisco
Bay Area that set privacy as a default paid higher interest rates, due to the reduced ability of banks to match
applicants to loans).
171
Campbell et al., supra note 7.
172
Acquisiti et al., supra note 13.
173
Ibid; Margot E. Kaminski, Binary Governance: Lessons from the GDPR's Approach to Algorithmic Accountability 92(6) SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA L. REV. 1529 (2019).
174
Some commentators foresaw some of the effects of privacy laws on competition. See, e.g., Campbell et al.,
supra note 7. Yet, to our knowledge, many of the dynamics exposed in this paper have not been previously
recognized.
175
Sam Schechner and Nick Kostov, Google and Facebook Likely to Benefit from Europe’s privacy crackdown,
WSJ (April 23, 2018), https://www.wsj.com/articles/how-europes-new-privacy-rules-favor-google-and-facebook-1524536324.
176
EU Commission, Enter the Data Economy, 21 EPSC STRATEGIC NOTES, January 11, 2017, at 1.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3548444

34

The Competitive Consequences of the GDPR

2020

vantages has become global, the GDPR’s effects on data markets cannot be disregarded. Two points are worth stressing. First, the GDPR has implications well beyond
the geographic borders of the EU. This is because many international firms which
operate in the EU, or trade with it, must comply with its rules.177 Once such firms
adopt the internal mechanisms necessary for GDPR compliance, these may be used
for non-EU data as well. In addition, some jurisdictions are following in the footsteps
of the EU and adopting laws which resemble the GDPR.178 Widespread adoption of
such laws could lead to even greater concentration of firms in international markets.
Second, most of the effects analyzed in this article are long-term ones, which will not
disappear once the market adjusts to the existence of the GDPR. It is thus worth
reevaluating the overall welfare effects of the legal data regime chosen. Note that this
is not to say the overall welfare effects of the GDPR are necessarily negative. The
GDPR may negatively affect competition but still be welfare-enhancing. This will be
the case if the harm to data subjects reduced by the GDPR is sufficient to compensate
for its competitive effects, including its potential to increase users’ participation in the
market based on increased trust.179 The overall balance depends on the relative magnitude of these effects.
While an in-depth exploration of tools for creating a more welfare-enhancing
equilibrium is beyond the scope of this article, we offer several suggestions. Most
importantly, competition law should give more weight to factors which might balance
the negative effects of the GDPR on competition and innovation. For example, when
evaluating the competitive effects of a merger or a joint venture, more weight should
be given to considerations such as the ability of firms to engage in welfare-enhancing
data sharing which may facilitate reductions in market concentration, or the potential
for significant data synergies that could not be realized otherwise. This implies, for
example, a more lenient policy towards mergers or joint ventures between small or
medium-sized data controllers, which would enable them to reach economies of scale
and scope in data analysis and compete more effectively with those that already enjoy
such economies. It also implies that when at least one data controller in a proposed
merger or joint venture already possesses strong comparative advantages in data analysis, a careful balance is required between the benefits of increased data synergies
and the need to ensure the ability of other firms to effectively compete, in light of the
increased hurdles to data collection and processing resulting from the GDPR. The
conditions for applying the essential facilities doctrine and granting access to data
might also need to be redefined in light of the effects of the GDPR. The interface
177

ANU BRADFORD, THE BRUSSELS EFFECT (2020), chapter 5; Batikas et al., supra note 10.
E.g., California Consumer Protection Act 1st Jan 2020, Cal AB 375 § 1798.125. The definition for the sale of
data to which the restrictions of this Act apply is wider than the one adopted in the GDPR. This implies that the
dynamics we identify may apply to a wider set of contexts. The Californian Act also forbids firms from refusing
to deal with consumers who decline to opt in, or from charging them higher prices, thereby potentially further
increasing transaction costs. Interestingly, the adoption of GDPR-like laws elsewhere around the world creates
both positive and negative externalities for the EU. On the positive side, broader adoption of such laws levels
the playing field with regard to foreign firms’ ability to realize some data-based advantages. In addition, such a
development signals a global shift in attitudes toward the protection of personal data, which in turn may
strengthen acceptance of the policy among the EU’s own citizens and firms. On the negative side, it might
increase international concentration and limit some data-based innovations that might have also benefitted EU
consumers.
179
See also Campbell et al., supra note 7.
178

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3548444

3

Competitive Consequences of the GDPR

2020

between the GDPR and competition law, in cases where harm to privacy is minimal
and benefits to competition and innovation are large, may also need to be reevaluated.180
In addition, assessments of market power and potential competition should take
into account the actual competitive effects of the GDPR. No longer can it be assumed
that new players seeking to accumulate large volumes of data face only low barriers,
as was the case in several earlier Commission decisions,181 especially where separate
entities collect different parts of the dataset. Consider, for example, the Commission’s
reasoning when it approved a joint venture between Google and the global biopharmaceutical firm Sanofi aimed at using big data analysis to improve the management
and treatment of diabetes.182 The competitive analysis at the time addressed concerns
that the venture would allow the parties to lock in patients by restricting their ability
to direct their data towards alternative services. The Commission dismissed such
claims on the grounds that data subjects had a right to data portability. Yet, as shown
in this article, such a right is generally not sufficient to address competitive concerns.
This is because the comparative advantages of the joint venture are partially based on
existing large datasets owned by the parties. It may be difficult for competitors to
overcome such comparative advantages unless they can convince a sufficiently large
number of users to sign up to their services, or unless they can combine different
datasets. The first option is limited by user “stickiness,” by the fact that the data potentially arrives in fragmented form and at different points in time, and by the fact that
economies of scale and scope and network effects in data analysis create significant
first-mover advantages that are difficult for new competitors to overcome. The second
option, data sharing, must overcome high hurdles, as elaborated in this article.
We offer several other suggestions that might go some way toward making the
GDPR more welfare-enhancing. First, where uncertainty regarding how to meet the
GDPR’s legal obligations contributes to concentration, it may be useful to consider
ways of limiting such uncertainty. For instance, as elaborated above, the GDPR establishes a right to data portability, but does not specify technical requirements for
meeting this commitment. The development (by regulators together with industry) of
technological standards for data portability and interoperability might help reduce the
consequent uncertainty as to what standards might ultimately be applied.183Second,

180

See also Nicolo Zingales, Data Protection Considerations in EU Competition Law: Funnel or Straightjacket
for Innovation? in THE ROLE OF INNOVATION IN COMPETITION ANALYSIS (Paul Nihoul and Peter Van
Cleynenbreugel eds., 2018)(Recognizing that the fundamental right to data protection cannot be ignored by
competition enforcers, the author calls for a framework of cooperation between competition and data protection
authorities).
181
For example, in the case of the Facebook/WhatsApp merger, the Commission ruled that “…there will continue to be a large amount of Internet user data that are valuable for advertising purposes and that are not within
Facebook's exclusive control.” Case M.7217 – Facebook/ WhatsApp, Commission decision pursuant to Article
6(1)(b) of Council Regulation No 139/2004, para.189. In the Microsoft/LinkedIn case, the Commission found
that “the combination of their respective datasets does not appear to result in raising the barriers to entry/expansion for other players in this space, as there will continue to be a large amount of internet user data that are
valuable for advertising purposes and that are not within Microsoft's exclusive control.” Case M.8124 – Microsoft / LinkedIn.
182
COMP/M.7813 SANOFI/GOOGLE/DMI JV, rec 63 et seq. 4. See also COMP/M.7337 IMS
HEALTH/CEGEDIM BUSINESS, rec. 218.
183
Gal and Rubinfeld, supra note 38.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3548444

36

The Competitive Consequences of the GDPR

2020

governments might support investment in the development of better and privacy protection tools which can retain more value from collected data.184 Third, priority could
be given to the development of better and faster tools for verification of GDPR compliance. And fourth, certification of data management and vetting processes could go
a long way toward reducing costs. The government can either certify such tools or
help facilitate such certification.185 In addition, the use of certified tools should be
taken into account when assessing liability, and presumptions based on the use of
reasonable tools should be created. This, in turn, could significantly reduce the risks
involved in data sharing.
A final suggestion relates to the structuring of mandatory data-sharing obligations
under other laws in a way which is sensitive to the fact that it has become more difficult for small or new firms to grow and enjoy significant data synergies by obtaining
data from external sources. To illustrate, under the Public Sector Information Directive,186 some types of governmental data must be shared. The regulation does not
differentiate between sharing with firms that already possess much data and with
those that do not. As argued by De la Mano and Padilla in another context, this may
entrench the dominance of the former to the extent that economies of scale exist in
the analysis of such data.187 Our findings expose additional grounds for this effect,
especially in situations where governmental data can act as a partial substitute for
personal data. It might thus be worth considering the option of asymmetric sharing of
data, so that in certain circumstances the obligation to share data will relate (mainly)
to sharing it with small or new entities. In line with this suggestion, it is worth exploring whether more flexible mechanisms for obtaining user consent, such as opt-out
rather than opt-in, should be applied with regard to certain types of data, the benefits
of which are undeniable.188
As this paper shows, privacy policy is interlinked with competition and the resultant data-based innovation in more ways than have yet been recognized. In particular, the GDPR raises the transaction costs of sharing data between different data
controllers. We hope that recognizing such effects will lead to reevaluating the balance reached and to the adoption of tools to ensure that overall welfare is increased.
While measuring privacy harms and comparing them to competition and innovation
harms is an extremely challenging task, which extends beyond this paper, the solutions we suggest generally avoid the need for such careful balancing, while assuming
that data protection is an essential factor in well-being.

184

See also Layton, supra note 117, p. 11-12.
ISO certification is already available for some data collection activities.
186
Directive 2013/37/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 amending Directive
2003/98/EC on the Re-Use Of Public Sector Information Text with EEA relevance.
187
De la Mano and Padilla, supra note 19.
188
See, e.g., Goldfarb and Tucker, supra note 148; Miller and Tucker, supra note 170.
185

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3548444

3

Competitive Consequences of the GDPR

2020

Appendix: Questions asked in interviews with firms whose business model is based
on the utilization of private data:
1. Based on your experience, what effects do you think that the GDPR (and similar
regulation) imposed on M&A activities? Did they strengthen, weaken, or not affect
incentives to merge in order to utilize the data of the target firm?
2. Has the GDPR significantly changed the ability to make use of private data gathered by a potential target firm before the merger?
3. Are these short-term or long-term obstacles? In other words, is this just a transition period and data-motivated mergers will soon flourish again?
4. What, if any, are the tools that you use—or that you know others in the industry
use—in order to overcome such legal obstacles to the use of private data collected
by the target firm?
5. Has this led to changes in market interactions- for example do you see more internal growth? More joint ventures, etc.?

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3548444

