Journal of Global Information Technology Management

ISSN: 1097-198X (Print) 2333-6846 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/ugit20

The Impact of GDPR on Global Technology Development
He Li, Lu Yu & Wu He
To cite this article: He Li, Lu Yu & Wu He (2019) The Impact of GDPR on Global Technology
Development, Journal of Global Information Technology Management, 22:1, 1-6, DOI:
10.1080/1097198X.2019.1569186
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/1097198X.2019.1569186

Published online: 24 Jan 2019.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 58631

View related articles

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 81 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=ugit20

JOURNAL OF GLOBAL INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY MANAGEMENT
2019, VOL. 22, NO. 1, 1–6
https://doi.org/10.1080/1097198X.2019.1569186

The Impact of GDPR on Global Technology Development
He Lia, Lu Yua, and Wu Heb
a
School of Management, Jilin University, Jilin, P. R. China; bDepartment of Information Technology and Decision
Sciences, Old Dominion University, Norfolk, VA, USA

ABSTRACT

KEYWORDS

The European Union’s General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) demands
significant data protection safeguards and poses both new challenges and
potential opportunities to organizations around the world. Most organizations are not yet adequately prepared for compliance with the GDPR. To
minimize liability under the GDPR, organizations around the world need to
make changes to be in compliance with the GDPR. This editorial preface
discusses GDPR’s impact on global technology development including both
challenges and opportunities. Furthermore, we discuss how China and the
U.S., the two leading global economic power, can better respond to the
challenges and opportunities brought up by GDPR.

General Data Protection
Regulation (GDPR); privacy
compliance; cybersecurity;
technology development;
data governance; risk
management; personal data

Introduction
General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), which came into effect on May 25, 2018, is a data
protection legislation which lays down rules for processing, storing, managing data from people who
are currently within the European Union(EU, 2016). This new legislation strengthens EU’s data
protection to meet the new privacy challenges brought by the development of digital technologies.
While the GDPR only protects EU citizens, its impact is bound to be global in nature, affecting any
organization that targets the European market or provides services and hold personally identifiable
information on EU residents. GDPR gives consumers a high degree of control, such as the right to
withdraw consent (Art.7), to be forgotten (Art.17). At the same time, high requirements are put
forward for data controllers and processors, including data protection by design and by default
(Art.25), recording all processing activities (Art.30). GDPR says that organizations should get user
consent to collect data and “implement appropriate technical and organizational measures” to
protect personal data of EU residents (Kaushik & Wang, 2018).
Organizations that process data related to EU residents will be held accountable for noncompliance with GDPR. In particular, GDPR poses both a new challenge and a potential opportunity
for technology companies, cloud service providers, data center providers and marketers which will
have to adopt stricter security measures, standards and processes to protect, process and manage
personal data to ensure their compliance with GDPR. Otherwise, they will likely to receive potentially large fines from the EU. GDPR defines personal data as anything that can be used to identify an
individual person. This includes personally identifiable details such as names, email addresses, social
security number, IP addresses, telephone numbers, location data, birth dates as well as other
information related to genetic, economic, cultural or social identity. Large technology companies
like Google, Facebook, and Amazon have already updated their privacy policies and practices to
comply with the GDPR. The organizations which are compliant with GDPR will likely have
a competitive advantage over their competitors who are not compliant.

CONTACT Wu He
whe@odu.edu
University, Norfolk, VA 23529, USA
© 2019 He Li, Lu Yu and Wu He

Department of Information Technology and Decision Sciences, Old Dominion

2

H. LI ET AL.

Given the global impact of GDPR, this editorial preface aims to discuss its impact on global
technology development. As many online and newspaper articles have discussed the general impact
of GDPR on business, this essay particularly focuses on the challenges and opportunities GDPR has
brought about on technology development in the United States and China, the two leading global
economic powers.

Impact on Technology Platforms
GDPR is expected to have a significant impact on the technology platforms and data architectures
that currently collect, store and manage personal data (Mackay, 2017). Since GDPR has high
requirements for data controllers and processors to handle personal data including data protection
by design and default, and recording all processing activities, organizations will have to conduct
a thorough internal assessment for their technology platforms and data architecture including
various information systems, websites, databases, data warehouse and data processing platforms in
order to better understand what personal data was collected and where personal data exists. After the
internal assessment, organizations will likely have to make changes to their technology platforms and
data architecture in order to meet GDPR’s requirements. In some cases, reengineering of existing
systems or platforms will be needed to reduce the risk of non-compliance with GDPR.
GDPR also requires organizations to offer EU residents robust privacy rights such as Right to be
Forgotten, Right of Access to Data, Right to Data Portability, and Right to Explanation of Automated
Decision-Making (Kaushik & Wang, 2018). If a user wants to find out what personal data a company
has collected about him or her and for what purpose, this user can request the company to provide
an answer in a timely manner (Right of Access to Data). It is possible that a large company such as
Amazon and Alibaba could receive thousands of requests from their customers about how the
company is using their personal data every day. If the customer is not satisfied with the way the
company handles his/her personal data, the customer could ask the company to delete the personal
data (Right to be Forgotten). Furthermore, companies that have employees living in the EU or from
the EU also need to handle their employees’ personal data such as photos, bank details, tax and
pension details, health and safety reports, sickness records and medical information, CVs, job
application forms, disciplinary procedures, holiday requests and salary information (Beacham,
2018). To meet the request of customers or employees for efficient access to their personal data
and to remove personal data from the system efficiently, the company may have to refine or
reengineer their existing platforms and systems. Specifically, first the company needs to identify
personal data related to this customer or employee from all sources such as customer relationship
management system, human resource management systems, databases and archives. Second, the
company needs to implement holistic search tools that can search across all technology platforms,
systems, archives and architectures to identify and extract personal data relating to individuals
(Mackay, 2017). Without holistic search tools, there is no guarantee that the company will be able
to ensure that all the personal data associated with an individual customer or employee can be
handled appropriately.
To meet the requirements of GDPR, companies need to invest a lot of manpower and resources
on upgrading their technology platforms, updating privacy policies, changing advertising practices
and adjusting data storage and processes, etc. The impacts on American and Chinese companies are
especially significant, since the U.S. and China, the two leading global economic powers, have many
companies that do business with the EU. According to the PricewaterhouseCoopers survey, 68% of
American companies are expected to spend between $1 million and $10 million to meet the GDPR
requirements, and 9% are expected to spend more than $10 million (PwC, 2017). Such a high cost
will eventually be passed on to consumers, and thus weaken the competitive advantage of Chinese
and American enterprises. Besides, GDPR is likely to be a tool of European commission to accuse
non-EU companies including Chinese and American companies of having problems in data protection and then block their pace of investments and mergers.

JOURNAL OF GLOBAL INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY MANAGEMENT

3

Some Chinese and American Companies have tried to comply with GDPR. For example, Huawei,
the Chinese telecommunications giant, has appointed data protection officers; and YouTube has
stopped supporting third-party advertising services on reserved buys in Europe after May 21, 2018.
Unfortunately, something that we don’t want is also happening. Yeelight, a large smart lighting
device company in China, announced that it would no longer provide services to European users；
Facebook and its subsidiaries WhatsApp and Instagram, as well as Google, were immediately sued
just hours after GDPR came into effect for their “forced consent”. These cases reflect the fact that
foreign companies’ business activities with the EU have already been heavily influenced by GDPR.

Impact on Cybersecurity
GDPR is expected to have implications on organizations’ cybersecurity policy and practice since it
requires companies to implement reasonable data protection measures to protect consumers’
personal data and privacy against data loss or exposure. Article 5 of the GDPR summarizes some
of the key privacy and data protection requirements such as requiring the consent of subjects for
data processing, anonymizing collected data to protect privacy, providing data breach notifications,
safely handling the transfer of data across borders, and requiring certain companies to appoint a data
protection officer to oversee GDPR compliance. Since many cybersecurity incidents and data
breaches have occurred in the past, GDPR now requires the data controller to “notify the personal
data breach to the supervisory authority without undue delay and, where feasible, not later than
72 hours after having become aware of it.” Thus, companies need to step up their cybersecurity
efforts to protect against threats and breaches and to minimize liability under the GDPR. GDPR will
further increase the demand for cybersecurity professionals and data protection officers. To address
the current skills shortage for cybersecurity professionals and data protection officers, both governments and technology companies will need to invest in more cybersecurity training and education
programs (Withey, 2018).
The GDPR’s high requirement for securing personal data also brings a new opportunity to
companies. Privacy and security issues are often accompanied by user trust, which is one of the
important issues in modern business. In recent years, scandals about personal data security vulnerability and cases of how companies unproperly use and sell information they collect from their
consumers have aroused general concern and led to negative impact on consumer trust (Midha,
2012). Capgemini’s report shows that 39% of consumers will spend more when they are convinced
that an organization protects their personal data (Capgemini Research Institute, 2018). In other
words, gaining consumer trust around data privacy and security could lead to more sales and
translate into competitive advantage (Conroy, Narula, Milano, & Singhal, 2014). Chinese and US
companies should seize the opportunity to enhance their capabilities for protecting personal data so
that they can not only minimize the legal liability of GDPR but also win the trust of consumers and
create a unique competitive advantage over those who cannot be in full compliance of GDPR.

Impact on Emerging Technologies
We believe that GDPR will have significant impacts on the development of emerging technologies.
As we know, emerging technologies such as artificial intelligence, block chains and cloud computing
are effective means of boosting performance and productivity. The development and application of
these emerging technologies are key to promote the economy and have become one of the strongest
competitive factors among countries. But it should be noticed that these technologies deliver their
value through massive data and high-quality algorithms. Stricter regulations on data handing and
processing are likely to inhibit new technology development and use, and will inevitably increase the
cost to develop new technologies.
GDPR will affect the development of Artificial Intelligence (AI) applications by increasing the
costs and limiting the application scope. Article 13 and 22 of GDPR require that certain algorithm

4

H. LI ET AL.

decisions need to be reviewed and explained by humans, and such restrictions will greatly increase
labor costs and break the inherent balance between accuracy and transparency; Article 17 provides
user with erasure of personal data without undue delay, which might destroy key rules underpinning
the AI system, and thus resulting in a decrease in the efficiency and accuracy of algorithms, or even
breaking it entirely. As to blockchains, it is difficult to identify the data controller and hard to
require each node to perform strict obligations (Wallace & Castro, 2018). Furthermore, as the data of
each node of the block chain affects subsequent records, if blockchain users have the right to delete
and correct data (as stipulated in articles 16 and 17 of GDPR), then the efficiency and effectiveness of
blockchain will cease to exist. With regard to cloud computing, GDPR creates obligations for cloud
platform service providers, who will be required to provide information about all intended processing to data subjects pursuant to Articles 13 and 14. This will definitely bring operational difficulties
and increase the cost of operating a cloud platform, as the efficiency of cloud computing comes from
optimal resource allocation which is determined by current tasks and cannot be fully determined at
the time of data collection.
Although many Chinese and American companies are obligated to comply with GDPR, the EU
companies are still the most affected in the field of emerging technologies since they mostly deal with
personal data of EU residents. If the EU emerging technology industry cannot effectively solve the
above-mentioned restrictions by means of significant technological upgrading, which seems to be
unlikely in the short term or in other ways, the development and application of emerging technologies
within the EU will slow down significantly. Many other relevant industries, such as credit cards,
e-commerce, as well as intelligent manufacturing, which are supported by those emerging technologies,
will also be significantly affected. In contrast, Chinese and U.S. companies will be less hindered in
improving and applying these emerging technologies than EU companies since they can create products
that serve their domestic consumers. In the long run, Chinese and U.S. companies may develop stronger
competitive advantage over EU companies in the area of emerging technologies.

Recommendations
Given the universal and significant impact of GDPR, we believe that China and the United States should
actively respond to those challenges and opportunities. Although many Chinese and American companies are not necessarily required to follow GDPR strictly, considering that privacy protection is an
inevitable requirement for future development and an important way to maintain competitiveness, we
believe that all organizations should take GDPR as a benchmark to gradually improve their privacy
protection awareness and capabilities. This editorial puts forward the following recommendations.
Focusing on Improving Privacy Protection Methods
China and the United States should seize their advantages with emerging technologies to explore
more secure and efficient data processing methods to enhance their capabilities to protect personal
data. For example, it can focus on improving privacy and personal data protection methods such as
optimizing anonymization methods and data mining algorithms to solve the contradiction between
transparency and efficiency. In addition to technical means, organizational measures also need to be
explored and learned from practice. For example, what methods are needed to measure and bridge
the gap that a business has to cross in order to achieve compliance with GDPR? How to estimate the
cost of implementing GDPR within a company? Fortunately, the Data Protection Impact Assessment
required by GDPR is a good way to test new technologies on privacy protection.
Paying Attention to Trust Building
Obviously, for those companies which have commercial or scientific relationship with the EU,
increasing user trust can greatly reduce GDPR-related complaints. Moreover, showing transparency

JOURNAL OF GLOBAL INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY MANAGEMENT

5

and honest privacy practice to users is an effective way to improve trust and reputation. Companies
around the world need to step up their efforts in privacy risk management and protection of
personal data in order to survive or remain competitive in the EU market.

Conclusion
The GDPR will have a massive impact on future technology development. Those who can adapt to
meet GDPR requirements will succeed in the future and those who cannot will eventually fail
(Wright, 2017). Although this editorial has discussed many potential challenges of GDPR, we
encourage companies to think of compliance with GDPR as a strategic opportunity for gaining
a competitive edge in this data-driven world. Technology companies that target global markets are
recommended to step up their efforts to secure their data, systems, products and services for
compliance with GDPR. We also encourage scholars and practitioners to study issues related to the
implementation and compliance of GDPR and share insights. IS and IT have the potential to help
in many important areas. For example, IS scholars can propose frameworks, methods and
architectures that meet GDPR’s requirements for revoking consent and permanently deleting
widely disseminated personal data (Politou, Alepis, & Patsakis, 2018), estimate the cost to achieve
compliance with GDPR, identify various factors that affect the compliance with GDPR, investigate
how culture and national conditions influence the implementation and compliance of GDPR, and
explore the impact of GDPR on operations and financial performance.

Notes on contributors
He Li is a Professor and Chair of the Department of Information Management, School of Management at Jilin
University, China. Her research interests include information and knowledge management, information behavior,
security and privacy, information system development and analysis, e-commerce user information development, and
innovative community management. Her research has been funded by the National Development and Reform
Commission, the Ministry of Science and Technology, and other enterprises in China.
Lu Yu is a third-year graduate student at the School of Management, Jilin University, China. Her research interests
include information security and privacy, and information behavior. Her work has been published in Journal of The
China Society for Scientific and Technical Information. She has presented papers and been invited as anonymous
reviewer of International Journal of Information Management, and Behaviour & Information Technology.
Wu He is an Associate Professor of Information Technology at Old Dominion University, Norfolk, VA, USA. His
research interests include Data Mining, Information Security & Privacy, Social Media, Knowledge Management and
Computing Education. His research has been funded by NSF, NSA, NASA and other organizations. He has published
over 80 journal articles in such outlets as Information & Management, Journal of the Association for Information
Science and Technology, International Journal of Information Management, and IEEE Transactions on Industry
Informatics.

References
Beacham, J. (2018). Is your practice GDPR ready? In Practice, 40(3), 124–125.
Capgemini Research Institute. (2018). Seizing the GDPR advantage: From mandate to high-value opportunity.
Retrieved from https://www.capgemini.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/GDPR-Report_Digital.pdf
Conroy, P., Narula, A., Milano, F., & Singhal, R. (2014). Building consumer trust - Protecting personal data in the
consumer product industry. Retrieved December 21, 2018, from https://www2.deloitte.com/insights/us/en/topics/
risk-management/consumer-data-privacy-strategies.html
European Union. (2016) General data protection regulation. Off J Eur Union 49: L119. Retrieved from https://gdprinfo.eu
Kaushik, S., & Wang, Y. (2018, December 20). Data privacy: Demystifying the GDPR. Retrieved from https://ischool.
syr.edu/infospace/2018/05/25/data-privacy-demystifying-gdpr/
Mackay, D. (2017). The impact of GDPR from a technology perspective – is your platform ready? Retrieved December
20, 2018, from https://www.ness.com/11101-2/

6

H. LI ET AL.

Midha, V. (2012). Impact of consumer empowerment on online trust: An examination across genders. Decision
Support Systems, 54(1), 198–205. doi:10.1016/j.dss.2012.05.005
Politou, E., Alepis, E., & Patsakis, C. (2018). Forgetting personal data and revoking consent under the GDPR:
Challenges and proposed solutions. Journal of Cybersecurity, 4(1), tyy001. doi:10.1093/cybsec/tyy001
PwC. (2017). Pulse survey: US companies ramping up General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) budgets. Retrieved
from https://www.pwc.com/us/en/services/consulting/library/gdpr-readiness.html
Wallace, N., & Castro, D. (2018). The impact of the EU’s new data protection regulation on AI. Retrieved from https://
www.datainnovation.org/2018/03/the-impact-of-the-eus-new-data-protection-regulation-on-ai/
Withey, V. (2018, December 20). The impact of GDPR on the technology sector. Retrieved from https://gdpr.report/
news/2018/03/19/the-impact-of-gdpr-on-the-technology-sector/
Wright, T. (2017). The impact of GDPR on marketing technology and cybersecurity. Retrieved December 22, 2018,
from https://martechtoday.com/impact-gdpr-marketing-technology-cybersecurity-201635

