See discussions, st ats, and author pr ofiles f or this public ation at : https://www .researchgate.ne t/public ation/326753224
Encryption and T okenization-Based System for Credit Card Information
Secu rity
Article    in  International Journal of C yber -Security and Digit al Forensics  · August 2018
DOI: 10.17781/P002462
CITATIONS
24READS
7,990
3 author s:
Gabriel Iw asok un
Feder al Univ ersity of T echnolog y
63 PUBLICA TIONS    389 CITATIONS    
SEE PROFILE
Taiwo Gabriel Omomule
Adek unle Ajasin Univ ersity
23 PUBLICA TIONS    128 CITATIONS    
SEE PROFILE
Raphael Oluf emi Akiny ede
Feder al Univ ersity of T echnolog y
31 PUBLICA TIONS    85 CITATIONS    
SEE PROFILE
All c ontent f ollo wing this p age was uplo aded b y Taiwo Gabriel Omomule  on 01 A ugust 2018.
The user has r equest ed enhanc ement of the do wnlo aded file.
                                                                                
   
 
  
Encryption and Tokenization -Based System for Credit Card Information 
Security  
Gabriel Babatunde Iwasokun1, Taiwo  Gabriel Omomule2, Raphael  Olufemi Akinyede3 
1Department of Software Engineering , Federal University of Technology, Akure, Nigeria  
2Department of C omputer Sciences, Adekunle Ajasin University, Akugba -Akoko, Nigeria  
3Department of Information System , Federal University of Technology, Akure, Nigeria  
1gbiwasokun@futa.edu.ng , 2taiwo.omomule@aaua.edu.ng  , 3roakinyede@futa.edu.ng  
 
ABSTRACT  
Existing methods for promoting credit card 
information security have exhibited confidentiality, 
privacy and integrity failures. In most cases, 
sensitive and classified data or information is 
presented in unencrypted formats to remote 
machines resulting in unauthori zed access and 
disclosure. Based on these findings, this paper 
presents an RSA  encryption  and tokenization -based 
system for credit card information security. The 
proposed system is composed of the merchant and 
tokenization modules as well as a token vault.  The 
merchant and the tokenization modules send credit 
card information and generat e the transaction 
validation token respectively while the token vault  
is a database with restricted and controlled access 
hosted on a cloud storage engine. The 
implementatio n of the system was carried out on 
Pentium IV with 2.0 GHZ Duo Core Processor and 2 
GB of RAM on Microsoft Windows 7 Operating 
System. APACHE server and HTML (Sublime) 
with CSS JavaScript served as the frontend while 
MySQL database from WAMP server and PHP  
joined as the backend on Mozilla Firefox browser. 
Analysis of the results of implementation with 
Master, Verve and Visa cards showed that the 
system deliver ed very high usability, adaptability 
and favorable experience for users. Analysis also 
showed the relative advantages and superiority of 
the system in credit card security, key size, mobile 
alert and tokenization over some other systems.  
KEYWORDS  
RSA, financial crime, credit card, tokenization, 
encryption.  
 
 1 INTRODUCTION  
Consequent to the rapid growth  in Information 
Technology (IT) industry  in recent years , the 
number of Internet users has witnessed 
explosive growth. Internet has offered great 
opportunity for improved communication and 
experience to the global citizens. It has also 
provided new drives for credit -card-based 
businesses and marketing by financial 
institutions towards reaching out to new 
markets and creating opportunities for 
economic growth. Credi t card payment 
processing (conceptualized in Figure 1) 
involves the submission of relevant information 
such as card number, payment fee, expiry date 
and so on  to the merchant for verification and 
submission  to the Payment Gateway (PG). The 
PG passes the re ceived information to the 
processor which then establishes a linkage with 
the customer’s bank for a decision on whether 
to push or drop the request. Money is not 
immediately transferred to the merchant’s bank, 
but instead, a token of settlement, which is a  
merchant’s electronic payment information for 
a certified transaction, is delivered [1]. The 
proliferation of Internet -based businesses has 
before time been largely attributed to the rising 
confidence levels and trust among participants 
and the extent to which information 
confidentiality can be maintained. However, in 
view of the emerging range of fraud,  theft, 
disruption and denial of service attacks on 
online transactions, stakeholders have 
expressed great concern, doubt and loss of 
confidence on credit card information 
transmission, privacy, integrity and security [2].  
 
283International Journal of Cyber-Security and Digital Forensics (IJCSDF) 7(3):  283-293
The Society of Digital Information and Wireless Communications (SDIWC), 2018 ISSN: 2305-001
                                                                                
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Unauthorized access, information theft and 
other breach es have exposed the security 
weaknesses in the existing and traditional 
Internet -based credit card system s with the  
attendant effect been loss of several millions of 
dollars annually [3-4]. A credit card fraud is 
committed when an individual inadvertently 
and callously use the information on the card for 
deception, misrepresentation and other selfish 
and personal reasons. It may be committed 
through lost/stolen card, account takeover, 
Cardholder -Not-Present (CNP), magnetic stripe 
erasure, card counterfeiting and skimming. 
Commonly used techniques in Internet credit 
card fraud include  site cloning, false merchant 
sites and unlawful credit card generation. 
Merchant related credit card frauds may be in 
form of collusion (merchant  and/or employees 
conspire to commit fraud using customers’  
accounts details and/or personal information ) or 
triangulation (fraudsters use  customer’s 
personal  information  and valid credit card 
details  to place  order for goods from a 
recognized  site). The risks associated with  
credit card fraud often imparted jointly  on the 
merchant and the cardholder , who may b e 
unaware of the attack. While cardholders are 
faced with the daunting challenge of getting a 
fraud -related charge reversed, merchants are 
confronted with  sales lost arising from  pay-back 
fees as well as threat of account closure or 
suspension  [5]. 
 2 CREDIT CARD PROCESSING  
A number of methods have been suggested for 
securing online -based credit card transaction s. 
Secure Socket layer (SSL) -based encryption 
has been used  for the prevention of 
eavesdropping during the transmission process. 
This method relies on  asymmetric key 
encryption for customer -merchant 
communication and promotes digital 
certificate -based authentication of the identity 
of the merchant [6].  Secure Electronic 
Transaction (SET) has been proposed as a 
protocol for ensuring secured credit card 
payment over the Internet. It operates by 
establishing protocols for cardholder and 
merchant registration, purchase request, 
payment authorization and payment captur e [1]. 
In contrast to  SSL, SET prevents illegal use of 
credit card number through the enforcement of 
exclusive sharing of information on transaction 
order and payment information with the 
merchant and bank respectively (dual 
signature). SET is however note d for its 
complexity which often times result s in some 
incidences of credit card insecurities over the 
Internet. Several other algorithms such as 
encryption algorithm and cryptography with 
significant advantages over SSL and SET had 
been formulated for the  safety and protection of 
credit card information.  Encryption algorithm 
is used to transfer card or transaction 
information into a form that makes it impossible 
to read without the appropriate knowledge (a 
key). It ensures privacy by keeping information 
hidden from intruders and impostors. The 
transformation of encrypted data back into an 
intelligible form at requires decryption. Same 
key may be required for encryption and 
decryption in some cases while they may differ 
in others. Cryptography is classified into secret 
key and public key. Secret -key cryptography is 
also known as symmetric cryptography and 
works with  same key for encryption and 
decryption (as shown in Figure 2) [7] and the 
most popular ones are Data Encryption 
Standard (DES), Advanced Encrypti on 
Standard (AES), Triple DES, Blow Fish, Two 
Fish, Three Fish among others  [8-20].  Customer  
Merchant  
 Payment  
Gateway  
Processor   Customer’s  
Bank  Merchant’s  
Bank  Card  
Information  
Information  Card  
Transaction  
Information  
Transaction  
Result  Conf NBR  
Conf NBR  
Conf NBR  Pay Info  
Figure 1:  Payment process model for Credit Card  
 
284International Journal of Cyber-Security and Digital Forensics (IJCSDF) 7(3):  283-293
The Society of Digital Information and Wireless Communications (SDIWC), 2018 ISSN: 2305-001
                                                                                
   
 
  
Sender  Encrypt  Decrypt  Receiver  Plaintext  Cipher  Plaintext  Text 
Different keys are used to encrypt and decrypt message  
Recipient  
Figure 3: Public key cryptography  public key  private key  Recipient  These techniques require  a priori knowledge of 
the message and its key by the sender and 
receiver for encryption and decryption 
respectively and their main challenge is th e 
complexity that trails the enforcement of the 
exclusive agreement on the secret key between 
the sender and receiver. Furthermore, the key 
generation, transmission and storage often 
require established and complex management 
issues [21].  Public -key cryptography is 
established for encryption and digital signatures 
with each person allotted public and private 
keys as shown in Figure 3 [7] . While public key 
is published and associated with users in a 
trusted (authenticated) manner, the privat e key 
is made secret based on non sharing of 
information between the sender and receiver 
thereby promoting privacy (encryption) and 
authentication (digital signatures) [7, 22 -23] . 
Common public key algorithms include Elliptic 
Curve Cryptography (ECC) and R SA 
algorithms [24 -25].  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Encryption strength is directly tied to key size 
as doubling the key length delivers an 
exponential increase in strength, although it 
does impair performance. The weaknesses of 
the encryption and cryptography algorithms 
further include large space requirement, 
susceptible to cipher text and cycle attacks, 
common modulus, cracking, low exponent and 
complexity as well as financial, bandwidth, 
power and delay overheads . 
 
 3 RELATED WORKS  
A modeling and classification approach for 
credit card fraud detection in electronic 
payment services is presented in [17]. The 
problem of fraud in online payment services 
was addressed using a whistle blowing strategy. 
A model of the history of legi timate 
transactions by entities such as the buyer, seller, 
card and cardholder was developed along a 
Support Vector Machine (SVM) -based method 
for the classification of the transactions as fraud 
or legitimate. Though the proposed method is 
applicable in de tection of credit card frauds 
based on historical analysis of financial data, it 
offers no real -time support and could not 
analyze the behavior of the entities.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The authors in [26] proposed a fuzzy clustering 
and neural network –based credit  card fraud 
detection system. The research analyzed the 
spending pattern  of credit card users and 
classified transactions as fraudulent or genuine 
based on deviation from usage patterns. A fraud 
detection model is abstractly represented as a 
5-tuple {C, P, SC, ɸUth, ɸLth}, where C = {C 1, 
C2, …, C n} is the set of cards on which  the 
detection is performed and P = {P(C 1), P(C 2), 
…, P(C n)} is the set of card holders profiles. 
The profile is a set of patterns on transaction 
amount, items purchased, time of transaction 
and so on. SC is the suspicion score for 
measuring the extent of deviation from normal 
profile, ɸUth `is the upper threshold value  for 0 ≤ 
ɸUth ≤ 1 and ɸLth is the lower threshold value for 
0 ≤ ɸLth ≤ 1 and ɸLth ≤ ɸUth. The hybridization of 
Fuzzy C -Means Clustering and Neural Network 
Sender  Encrypt  Decrypt  Receiver  Plaintext  Cipher  Plaintext  Text 
Same key is used to encrypt and decrypt message  
Shared secrete key  
Figure 2: Private key cryptography  
285International Journal of Cyber-Security and Digital Forensics (IJCSDF) 7(3):  283-293
The Society of Digital Information and Wireless Communications (SDIWC), 2018 ISSN: 2305-001
                                                                                
   
 
  
User Authentication 
and Verification of 
Card Details  Behavioural 
Analysis 
Phase  Learning 
Phase  
Reject  Reject  Reject  Incoming 
Transactions  
Figure 4: Prototype Structure for credit card fraud detection  for credit card fraud detection is p resented in 
Figure 4 showing a multi -layered approach. The 
research established a model for the 
investigation of the neurological and behavior  
pattern in a credit card transaction but l acks 
capability  for implementing attributes such as 
location of transac tion and time gap between 
transactions which are very relevant for 
improved security rules.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In [15],  a cloud -based system for local data 
integrity and privacy protection is presented. 
The system uses BlowFish encryption 
algorithm to encrypt local clients -domiciled 
data so that a perfect data security and privacy 
protection mode is established without 
infringing on the experience and efficiency of 
use. A modified encryption algorithm was 
developed for  address ing some of the existing 
problems of data security, but its application is 
limited to local encryption of data. The authors 
in [19] developed a vouch er/certificate and 
bilinear pairing cryptography -based system for 
data, information and communication safety. 
Bilinear pairing and symmetry key were used 
for encryption of the communicated messages 
and a problem -free transfer of data on the cloud 
respectiv ely. Trusted third party was also used 
to establish a security domain on the cloud 
while ID based blind signature was adopted for 
the attainment of required security level. 
Though the system afford users the opportunity 
of self established level of securit y, it does not 
support concurrent access control on personal 
user’s security activities. In [10], a flask 
architecture -based model for personalized 
security in cloud -based e -banking is introduced. 
The model provided a role -based 
reconfigurable access control strategy that 
ensures safe and secured e -payment system based on user -defined policies. The model 
demonstrated ability for personalized security 
in cloud environment but improper 
configuration for user policies may constitutes 
stumbling blocks  to its implementation .  A  
DES -based system for encryption and 
decryption in network data transmission is  
presented in [9]. The system is capable of 
analyzing  data security risk and requirements as 
well as deploying security functions and 
process through encryption. Cipher Block 
Chaining (CBC) -based DES was used to 
encrypt information in transition on the net work 
with each block of Electronic Code Book 
(ECB) encrypted cipher text XORed with the 
next plain text block for encryption, thus 
ensuring dependency between current and 
previous blocks. The system promoted data 
security in cloud computing environment but  
error transmission across blocks is still a 
possibility .  
In [20], an encryption -based model for secured 
cloud storage access and query is presented. 
The system focuses on query service, privacy 
protection, authentication management, data 
storage as well as integrity protection in the 
cloud environment. With this model, only cloud 
service -oriented storage and query users are 
allowed  to interact through cloud storage and 
the management servers. The s erver ensures 
privacy based on trusted third party user 
authentication and information management . It 
is also in charge of key management and 
distribution, safe registration of data as well as 
storage of queries results, cipher text and hash 
table of keyword. The strength of the model lies 
in its support for data  privacy based on 
symmetric encryption while its weakness is its 
susceptibility to security breach and conflict 
arising from key management between the 
cloud users. The authors in [14] proposed a data 
confidentiality and privacy execution model 
which utili zes the public and private clouds for 
non-sensitive and sensitive data respectively. 
The model supports application level 
partitioning and allows integrations of 
additional computing or storage resources to the 
private cloud from public clouds without 
comp romising the confidentiality or privacy of 
data. The model is suitable for the enhancement 
286International Journal of Cyber-Security and Digital Forensics (IJCSDF) 7(3):  283-293
The Society of Digital Information and Wireless Communications (SDIWC), 2018 ISSN: 2305-001
                                                                                
   
 
  
of data security benefits but its avoidance of 
public clouds for sensitive data and 
computation is a major concern.  In [16], a 
token -based model for securing  outsour ced data 
and arbitrary computations with lower latency  
on the cloud computing environment is 
presented. The model is based on tamper -proof 
hardware token and encryption by 
homomorphism and supports a resource 
constrained tamperproof hardware token in the 
setup pre -processing phase and performs 
symmetric cryptographic operations in parallel 
in the online phase. The model promotes data 
confidentiality, integrity and verifiability but 
lacks capabilities to protect data on 
transmission in the cloud. In [18], a system that 
is based on homomorhpic token with distributed 
verification of erasure -coded data as well as 
signature generation and matching is developed 
for addressing the problem of insecurity in 
cloud data storage. The system ensures 
redundancy of parity vectors and data 
dependability using error -correcting code in file 
distribution preparation. The system also 
guarantees the integrity of cloud -based data 
using two -way handshake and provides a 
schematic approach to resisting Byzantine 
failure, malicious da ta modification and server 
colluding attack. The weakness of the system is 
expressed in its failure to consider the security 
of data in transition. In [13],  a number -less 
credit card Kerberos Cryptographic -based 
system is presented as a solution to the rising 
cases of credit card frauds. A secured electronic 
payment system that conceals credit card 
number and makes it exclusive to the holder 
was developed. To kens were generated based 
on fee , client and merchant information. The 
system uses Kerberos authentication protocol to 
exchange tokens between buyers and 
merchants. Though the  research contributed to 
securing  credit card transactions, the system 
lacks capa bilities for implementation in a 
distributed environment due to its low 
operational speed and complexity. A credit card 
security system for e -payment is presented in 
[8]. The research was premised on the need to 
curtail the rising trend of hacking of credi t card 
details on the Internet as well as provide a 
mechanism for different commercial institutions to minimize all attendant problems 
of credit card transactions. The research 
methodology involves a questionnaire -based 
survey of banks as well as inferenti al and 
descriptive statistics -based analyses and 
interpretations. Though the authors claimed 
some success in credit card frauds reduction, the 
research only presented theoretical basis with 
no evidence of practical process.  
In [4], a  practical security en hancement scheme 
for one -time credit card payment is presented. A 
cryptographic hash function -based credit card 
number and transaction verification algorithm 
was formulated. The hash function was used to 
generate a one -time credit card number and a 
secret pin, S that is exclusive to the card holder 
and issuer. The transaction verification model 
considers four transactions T 0, T 1, T 2, T 3 
ordered on the processing time and for 
cryptographic function χ, T 1 = χ(T 0||S), T 2 =  
χ(T 1||S), T 3 =  χ(T 2||S). T 0 is assu med to have 
been verified by the card issuer most recently 
and for transactions T 1, T2 and T 3 all in instant 
verification scenario, then the transactions 
arriving for verification have the same order as 
their transaction times and the card issuer is 
only r equired to compute the hash chain and 
verify sequentially. A security analysis model 
that is based on the probability that an attacker 
knows a single verifiable transaction is 
presented as follows:  
𝑀𝑎𝑥   𝑄 +𝑛 
2 𝑠 ,  𝑄 +𝑛 
10 𝑇                             (1) 
 𝑄 ,  𝑆 ,  𝑇 denote the length of Q, S or T 
respectively and the length of Q is constrained 
by a queueing policy. The algorithm permits the 
verification of at most m transactions 
verification and the probability of success is 
presented as follows:  
𝑀𝑎𝑥 𝑚  𝑄 +𝑛 
2 𝑠 ,𝑚  𝑄 +𝑛 
10 𝑇                   (2) 
The model was simulated based on the Poisson 
distribution process of the exponential 
distribution time between two payment 
transactions and the delayed verification and its 
287International Journal of Cyber-Security and Digital Forensics (IJCSDF) 7(3):  283-293
The Society of Digital Information and Wireless Communications (SDIWC), 2018 ISSN: 2305-001
                                                                                
   
 
  
Figure 6: Credit Card Number  
effectiveness for one -time credit card number 
and transaction verifications was established. 
However, since the model is based on hashing 
function, it is susceptible to failure in cases of 
sophisticated attacks such as replay attacks. 
Furthermore, due to transmission error or 
network disconnection, a t ransaction may not 
be delivered to its merchant site or card issuer 
site and this may result in confirmation failure  
4 PROPOSED SYSTEM  
The proposed system addresses some of the 
limitations of the reviewed and reported works 
and is composed of the merchant and 
tokenization modules as well as the token vault 
as conceptualized in Figure 5.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The merchant module provides the platform for  
a customer (a credit or debit card holder) to send 
credit card information while the tokenization 
module is used to generate transaction 
validation token and is controlled by the 
payment gateway. The token vault  is a database 
with restricted and controlled access hosted on a 
cloud storage engine. As shown in Figure 6, a 
credit card number consists of the bank 
identification number (BIN), account number 
and the check digit which are used for 
identification.  
 
4.1 Card Number Validation  
The merchant validates the credit card number 
based on Luhn mathematical formula. Given 
that S  = {A1, A 2, …, An-1, A n} represents a 
sequence of credit card with n digits. The sum,   
S1 and S 2 of the digit of the odd and even 
products respectively, are computed as follows:  
𝑆1 = 𝑙𝑘 𝑛−1
𝑘=1;  𝑙𝑘 ,𝑖𝑓 𝑙𝑘 <10                                                                                    
𝑙𝑘 = 𝑙𝑘 \10 + 𝑙𝑘 𝑚𝑜𝑑 10 ,𝑖𝑓 𝑙𝑘 ≥10 (3) 
𝑆2 = (𝐴𝑘 𝑛−1
𝑘=2𝑖),      ∀𝑖=1…𝑛−1      (4) 
𝑍=  𝑆1 +𝑆2  +𝐴𝑛                           (5) 
𝑙𝑘  and 𝐴𝑒  are obtained by doubling the digits 
that occupy the kth odd and even positions 
respectively. The card number is validated if Z 
mod 10 = 0 . The  credit card number is 
encrypted based on a cryptographic scheme 
given as follows:  
𝐸 𝑀 −→𝐶                                        (6) 
𝐷 𝐶 −→𝑀                                        (7) 
 
E, M, C and D represent Encryption, Message 
(Plaintext), Ciphertext and Decryption 
respectively. Rivest -Shamir -Adleman (RSA) 
encryption algorithm which is based on the 
combination of prime factorization, Euler’s 
totient function, Euler’s totient theorem and  
Extended Euclidean Algorithm (EEA) is used to 
compute the private key for decryption process.  
Prime Factorization is a fundamental theorem 
of arithmetic that establishes that any number 
greater than 1 can be written exactly one way as 
a product of prime numbers. For a prime 
number p, Euler’s Totient Function  ɸ is 
expressed as ɸ(p) =  p -1. For primes p and q, Cloud Server  
Merchant 
Website  
Merchant 
Database  Token/  
Cipher -text 
DB 
Token Server  
(Decrypt Cipher 
with text key)  
Payment 
Gateway  Merchant 
send token  
Encryption 
User Info  
User entered 
credit card info  
Figure 5: Architectural design of the proposed system  
288International Journal of Cyber-Security and Digital Forensics (IJCSDF) 7(3):  283-293
The Society of Digital Information and Wireless Communications (SDIWC), 2018 ISSN: 2305-001
                                                                                
   
 
  
No Yes Prime?  
n = p*q  
ɸ(n) = (p -1)(q-1) 
 Input a random 
number, e  Input two numbers  
e and ɸ(n)   
are co -prime ? 
Yes 
Figure 7: Flowchart of RSA Algorithm  Encrypt with PUK (e,  n) 
Decrypt with PRK (d, n) Calculate private 
key d using EEA  
 Ciphertext  
 Plaintext  
 No ɸ(p.q) = (p -1)(q-1).  Euler’s Totient Theorem 
states that ɸ p.q = p−1  q−1 . The RSA 
algorithm involves three steps; namely key 
generation, encryption and decryption as 
presented in Figure 7.  
The gateway sends the cipher -text to the 
tokenization server for decryption using RSA 
algorithm with Extended Euclidean Algorithm 
(EEA) -based private key. EEA computes a 
private key, A based on the matrix iterative 
scheme using ɸ(n) and a public key e as 
follows:  
A = ɸ(n)ɸ(n)
𝑒 1                                           (8) 
 
4.2 Tokenization  
A token is generated for the credit card number, 
and stored alongside the cipher text in the token 
vault (Token database). The tokenization 
module decrypts the cipher text and generates 
tokens from the real card information.  During 
tokenization, a random number generator is 
used to generate a sequence of integers. For 
each credit card number starting from the left position to the 6th digit, the last four digits to the 
right is used as a placeholder for the 
tokenization of the real card number. Given that 
i = 1 to U, where i is a counter for numbers of 
transactions and U is the transaction upper 
bound, then:  
 for i = 1 (first transaction to generate a 
token)  
      𝑇1 = 𝑥.𝐴𝑘 +𝑦  𝑚𝑜𝑑 𝐴𝑘 ,∀ 𝑛,𝑘
=1…𝑗,∀ 𝑥,𝑦=0…9     (9) 
for i = 2;  second transaction  
If the same credit card number is used, then 
generate a new token T 2 from token T 1, else 
generate token T 2 from the card number  
for i = U; upper -bound transaction  
If the same credit card number is used, 
token TU is generated from token TU−1 , 
else generate token TU  from the card 
number  
𝐴𝑘  is a credit card number, 𝑇𝑖 , i=1, 2, … U is 
the token generated,  x and y are any random 
single digit number and j is the 6th digit. The 
notation mod 𝐴𝑘  indicate that the expression 
in parentheses is divided by 𝐴𝑘 , and then 
replaced with the remainder. The parameter 
𝐴𝑘  and the choice of x and y  determine the 
characteristics of the random number 
generator.  
5 IMPLEMENTATION  
The implementation of the RSA encryption and 
tokenization -based platform for securing credit 
card information was carried out on Microsoft 
Windows 7 Operating System environment on 
Pentium IV with 2.0 GHZ Duo Core Processor 
and 2 GB of RAM. APACHE server and HTML 
(Sublime) with CSS, JavaScript served as the 
frontend while MySQL database from WAMP 
server and PHP were the backend on Mozilla 
Firefox browser. The web -based system is 
authentication -based and is divided into the user 
and the admin sessions. The user session takes 
the user th rough the home, registration, lo gin, 
Luhn test, encryption, decrypti on, tokenization 
and confirmation interfaces. The home screen 
provides the system information while the 
registration interface is used for user’s 
289International Journal of Cyber-Security and Digital Forensics (IJCSDF) 7(3):  283-293
The Society of Digital Information and Wireless Communications (SDIWC), 2018 ISSN: 2305-001
                                                                                
   
 
  
registration and setup. It leads to the login 
interface which is used to validate the 
authenticity of the user  through supply of 
pre-registered username and password. The 
Luhn Test interface is used to investigate the 
validity of a Master, Verve or Visa Card 
number and as a first step of the RSA -based 
encryption as shown in Figure 8.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This test is terminated with the display of the 
Encryption interface that shows the credit card 
number being validated, Luhn time and status as 
well as success or failure report as shown in 
Figure 9. At a successful completion of the 
modal process for encryption, the decryption 
page is displayed with the obtained ciphertext 
as shown in Figure 10. The credit card number 
is not displayed because it is currently 
encrypted  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The aftermath of decryption is the display of the 
tokenization interface for a 6 -digit t oken to be 
generated and sent to the user’s pre -registered mobile phone number for acknowledgement 
and confirmation based on request screen 
shown in Figure 11. The system keep logs of 
users’ information such as date and time of 
operation, token generated, token received and 
acknowledgement times as well as the new 
modulus and public keys generated for RSA 
algorithm -based operation on a Master, Verve 
or Visa credit card information.  
 
 
. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 12 presents the average time taken to 
complete the encryption, decryption, 
tokenization and the confirmation processes for 
3080 randomly selected users from financial 
and educational institutions and agencies that 
participated in the experimental an alysis of the 
system. Table 1 presents the computation times 
(based on the prescribed algorithms) for Luhn 
test, encryption, decryption and tokenization in 
microseconds for Master, Verve and Visa cards 
supplied by the users. It is revealed that only 
72.4%,  21.4% and 6.1% of Master, Visa and 
Verve credit cards respectively passed Luhn 
test. The higher tokenization time for each card 
number is attributed to the SMS delivery delay  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9: The encry ption interface  
Figure 10: Decryption interface  
Figure 11: Token Confirmation Page  
Figure 8: Luhn Test  
290International Journal of Cyber-Security and Digital Forensics (IJCSDF) 7(3):  283-293
The Society of Digital Information and Wireless Communications (SDIWC), 2018 ISSN: 2305-001
                                                                                
   
 
  
Figure 12: Activities average execution times  
Table 1: Computational times  
Card  Time/  
frequency  Luhn Time 
(ms) Time/  
frequency  Encryption 
Time (ms)  Time/  
frequency  Decryption 
Time (ms)  Time/  
frequency  Tokenization 
Time (ms)  
Master  104.81/223  0.47 106.797/218  0.48 106.82/218  0.49 111.18/218  0.51 
Visa 30.98/66  0.46 29.90/65  0.46 30.55/65  0.47 31.85/65  0.49 
Verve  7.79/19  0.41 8.17/19  0.43 7.98/19  0.42 8.74/19  0.46 
 
Table 2: Users rating of the system  
Index  Excellent 
(5) V. Good 
(4) Good (3)  Average 
(2) Poor 
(1) Mean  
Reliability  850 1720  510 0 0 4 
Speed  530 2020  530 0 0 4 
Security  2270  790 20 0 0 5 
Effectiveness  1000  1670  410 0 0 4 
Usability  910 1350  810 10 0 4 
Adaptability  1200  1400  460 0 0 4 
User 
Experience  1950  890 240 0 0 5 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The decryption time is relatively larger than the 
encryption time due to the variation in the 
length of the ciphertext generated. The 
encryption time for a ciphertext after 
performing Luhn test is relatively larger than 
the Luhn time and this is explained by the 
variation in the  length of the credit card number 
supplied by the experimental users. The 
proposed system implemented 16 -digit Master 
card, 16 or 13 -digit Visa card and 19 -digit 
Verve card.  The Linkert scale -based rating of 
the system by users based on  the metrics of  
reliability, speed, security, effectiveness, 
usability, adaptability and experience is also 
presented in Table 2. It is revealed that on the 
average, the selected users rated the system a 
‘very good’ performance on ‘reliability’, ‘speed’, ‘effectiveness’,  ‘usability’ and 
‘adaptability’ while ‘excellent’ rating is 
recorded for ‘security’ and ‘user experience’. 
These ratings gave a significant approval of the 
system by the selected users and also 
established  their conviction on satisfactory 
performance of th e system  in securing credit 
card information during online financial 
transactions.  Comparative analysis of the 
findings from the research with results from 
some other existing works is presented in Table 
3. It is revealed that the proposed system 
showed be tter performances in securing credit  
card information.  
 
 
6 CONCLUSION  
This paper presented the design of an RSA 
encryption and tokenization -based system for 
combating fraud on online credit card 
transactions . The system requires 
cloud -computing technology to function and its 
main advantages include its ability to ensure 
non-repudiation of transaction as well as 
secrecy of card transaction data or information. 
Results of its impl ementation buttressed its 
effectiveness, speed efficiency and 
applicability. It was also revealed that the 
system will deliver very high usability, 
adaptability and favorable experience for 
users.  Comparative analysis with related and 
relevant systems sho wed its relative 
advantages and superiority in areas such as 
credit card security, key size, mobile alert and 
tokenization.  
REFERENCES  
1 Ismail  R, and Zainab  A. N.:  Information systems 
security in special and public libraries : an 
assessment of status, 16(2), 45–62 (2011) . 
Figure 12: Activities average execution times  
291International Journal of Cyber-Security and Digital Forensics (IJCSDF) 7(3):  283-293
The Society of Digital Information and Wireless Communications (SDIWC), 2018 ISSN: 2305-001
                                                                                
   
 
  
Table 3: Comparative Analysis with other  models  
Metrics  Tribhuwan 
et al. [18] Kalpana & 
Singaraju 
[27] Gandhi et 
al.[9] Hamidi, 
et.al. [10] Yang, et 
al.[19] Lin, et al. [15] Kartit, & 
Marraki 
[11] Current 
Research  
Security Level  Average  Average  Average  Low Average  Average  High  High  
Efficiency  Average  Average  Average  Low Low Average  High  High  
Cryposystem 
Algorithm  Not used  RSA  DES  Not 
used Not used  BlowFish  AES and 
RSA  RSA  
Key size (for 
data)  Not used  Weak (512 
bits) Weak (56 
bits) Not 
used Not used  First 2 bits for 
security key  Average 
(1024 
bits)  Strong (2048 
bits) 
Cloud 
environment  Not used  Used  Used  Used  Used  Used  Used  Used  
Adaptability  Average  Average  Average  Low Low Average  High  High  
Mobile Alert 
Service  Not used  Not used  Not used  Not 
used Not used  Not used  Not used  Used for token 
notification  
Token usage for 
data security  Token used for 
verification  Not used  Not used  Not 
used Not used  Not used  Not used  Token used for 
data security  
 2 Akinyede  R. O.:  Development of a Payment 
System for e -Commerce and banking industry in 
Nigeria. A Thesis Submitted for Fulfillment of the 
Requirements for the Degree of Masters of 
Technology, Computer Science, The Federal 
University of Technology, Akure, Nigeria , (2005 ) 
3 Internet Fraud Statistics Reports  (2011), 
http://www.fraud.org/internet/intstat.htm ., 
Accessed 23/04/2017  
4   Li Y., Zhang  W.: Securing credit card transactio ns 
with one -time payment scheme, 4, 413–426 
(2005) .      https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.elerap.2005.06.002 , Accessed 
12/05/2016  
5 Bhatla  T. P. : Understanding Credit Card Fraud, 
Card Business Review  (2003 ) http:// 
www.tcs.com/0_whitepapers/htdocs/credit_card_
fraud_white_paper_V_1.0.pdf , Accessed 
02/06/2017  
6 Shamir  A.: Secureclick: A web payment system 
with disposable credit card numbers Lecture notes 
in computer science, Springer ( 2002 ) 
7 Bjurling  P.: Design and Im plementation of a 
Secure In -app Credit Card Payment System , A 
Masters Thesis Submitted to Department of 
Computer Science, School of Computing at 
Linkopings University , Sweden  (2013 ) 
8 Dara  J., Gundemoni  L.: Credit Card Security and 
E-payment: Enquiry into credit Card Fraud in 
E-payment, A Master Thesis Continuation 
Courses in Computer  and System Science 
Submitted to the Department of Business 
Administration and Social Sciences, Division of 
Information systems unit, Lulea University of 
Technology  (2006 ). 
9 Gandhi  V., Bansal  S., Kapoor  R., Dhawan  A.: 
Cloud computing security architecture - 
implementing des algorithm in cloud for data 
security”, International Journal of Innovative 
Research in Engineering and Science (IJIRES), 
9(2) (2013 )  10 Hamidi  N. A. , Nafarieh  A., Hamidi  A., Robertson  
B.: Personalized Security Approaches in 
E-Banking Employing Flask Architecture over 
Cloud Environment. Procedia - Procedia 
Computer Science , 21, 18–24 (2013) . https :/ 
/doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2013.09.005 , Accessed 
18/09/2016  
11 Kartit  Z., Marraki  M. E. L. : Applying Encryption 
Algorithm to Enhance Data Security in Cloud 
Storage, Laboratory of Research in Informatics 
and Telecommunication (LRIT), University of 
Mohammed V, Facul ty of Sciences, Rabat, 
Morocco (  2015 ) 
12 Khan  S. S. , Scholar  M. E. : Cloud Security  Using 
Multilevel Encryption Algorithms, 5(1) ( 2016 ) 
https://doi.org/10.17148/ IJARCCE.2016.5116 , 
Accessed 16/05/2017  
13 Kim J. E.: A secure on -line credit card transaction 
method Based on Kerbero s authentication 
protocol , A Master Thesis in Computer Science  
Submitted to the School of Computer Science, 
Howard R., Hughes College of Engineering, 
Graduate College University of Ne vada, Las 
Vegas  (2010 ) 
14 Ko S. Y. , Jeon  K., Morales  R: The HybrEx model 
for confidentiality and privacy in cloud 
computing. In Proceedings of the 3rd USENIX 
conference on Hot topics in cloud computing, 
HotCloud , Berkeley, CA, USA, USENIX 
Association  (2011. ) 
15 Lin Q. T. , Wang  C. D. , Pan  J., Ling  L., Lai J. H. : 
Local Data Secur ity and Privacy Protection in 
Cloud Service Applications. Ninth International 
Conference on Frontier of Computer Science and 
Technology , 254–258 (2015) . https://doi.org/ 
10.1109/FCST.2015.39 , Accessed 17/07/2017  
16 Sadeghi  A., Schneider  T., Winandy  M., Horst  G.: 
Token -Based Cloud Computing, Springer -Verlag 
Berlin Heidelberg , 417–429 (2010)  
17 Santiago  G. P. , Pereira  A. C. M. , Hirata  J. R.:  A 
modeling approach for credit card fraud detection 
in electro nic payment services. Proceedings of the 
292International Journal of Cyber-Security and Digital Forensics (IJCSDF) 7(3):  283-293
The Society of Digital Information and Wireless Communications (SDIWC), 2018 ISSN: 2305-001
                                                                                
   
 
  
30th Annual ACM Symposium on Applied 
Computing , 2328 –2331  (2015) . https://doi.org/ 
10.1145/2695664.2695990 , Accessed 23/11/2016  
 18 Tribhuwan  M. R. , Bhuyar  V. A., Pirzade  S.: A 
system for addressing the problems of data 
security in cloud data storage, International 
Conference on Advances in Recent Technologies 
in Communication and Computing, (ICARTCC),  
(2010 ) 
19 Yang  F., Hsu  C. W. , Chiu  S. H. : An E -cash 
Paymen t Syste m on Cloud, Department of 
Computer Science and Information Engineering, 
Chaoyang University of Technology, 1 –12 
(2014) . 
20 Zhou  M., Jiang  Z.: Design and Implementation of 
Cloud Storage Security System, Applied 
Mechanics and Materials , 220, 2325 -2329  (2012) .  
21 Din I., Mahmud  F.: Secure electronic payment 
through RSA algorithm, manuscript submitted to 
Department of Computer Science and 
Engineering, RUET, Rajshahi  (2014 ) 
22 G. Saini, and N. Sharma, Triple Security of Data 
in Cloud Computing, International Journal of 
Computer Science and Information Technologies 
(IJCSIT), 5 (4), 5825 -5827  (2014)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 23 Barr D.: Public Key Infrastructure,  Technology 
and Programs Division , Cryptography and 
Boolean Operation, IJCSI International Journal of  
Computer Science Issues, 7(2) (2010 ) 
24 Suresha  R. G.: Enhancing Security in Cloud 
Storage using ECC Algorithm, International  
Journal of Science and Research, 2(7) (2013 ) 
25 Kakkar A., Singh M. L., Bansal P. K. : Comparison 
of Various Encryption Algorithms and 
Techniques for Secured Data Communication in 
Multinode Network, 2(1), 87 –92 (2012).  
 26 Behera T. K., Panigrahi S. : Credit Card Fraud 
Detection: A Hybrid Approach Using Fuzzy 
Cluste ring andamp;amp;amp; Neural Network. 
Second International Conference on Advances in 
Computing and Communication Engineering , 
494–499 (2015) . https://doi.org/10.1109/ , 
Accessed 18/02/2017  
27  Kalpana P., Singaraju S. : Data Security in Cloud 
Computing using RSA Algorithm, International 
Journal of Research in Computer and 
Communication Technology , 1(4) (2012).  
 
 
 
293International Journal of Cyber-Security and Digital Forensics (IJCSDF) 7(3):  283-293
The Society of Digital Information and Wireless Communications (SDIWC), 2018 ISSN: 2305-001
View publication stats