See discussions, st ats, and author pr ofiles f or this public ation at : https://www .researchgate.ne t/public ation/352903703
The T okenization of Everything: T owards a Framework for Understanding the
Potentials of T okenized Assets
Conf erence Paper  · July 2021
CITATIONS
55READS
22,389
4 author s, including:
Roger Heines
Univ ersity of St . Gallen
9 PUBLICA TIONS    186 CITATIONS    
SEE PROFILE
Reinhar d Jung
Univ ersity of St . Gallen
146 PUBLICA TIONS    1,807  CITATIONS    
SEE PROFILE
All c ontent f ollo wing this p age was uplo aded b y Roger Heines  on 11 July 2021.
The user has r equest ed enhanc ement of the do wnlo aded file.
Association for Information Systems Association for Information Systems 
AIS Electr onic Libr ary (AISeL) AIS Electr onic Libr ary (AISeL) 
PACIS 2021 Pr oceedings Pacific Asia Conf erence on Information 
Systems (P ACIS) 
7-12-2021 
The T okenization of E verything: T owar ds a F ramework for The T okenization of E verything: T owar ds a F ramework for 
Understanding the P otentials of T okenized Assets Understanding the P otentials of T okenized Assets 
Roger Heines 
Univ ersity of St. Gallen , roger .heines@student.unisg.ch 
Christian Dick 
Univ ersity of St. Gallen , christian.dick@alumni.unisg.ch 
Christian P ohle 
Univ ersity of St. Gallen , christian.pohle@hsgalumni.ch 
Reinhar d Jung 
Univ ersity of St. Gallen , reinhar d.jung@unisg.ch 
Follow this and additional works at: https:/ /aisel.aisnet.or g/pacis2021 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Heines, Roger; Dick, Christian; P ohle, Christian; and Jung, Reinhar d, "The T okenization of E verything: 
Towar ds a F ramework for Understanding the P otentials of T okenized Assets" (2021). PACIS 2021 
Proceedings . 40. 
https:/ /aisel.aisnet.or g/pacis2021/40 
This material is br ought t o you b y the P acific Asia Conf erence on Information Systems (P ACIS) at AIS Electr onic 
Library (AISeL). It has been accepted for inclusion in P ACIS 2021 Pr oceedings b y an authoriz ed administr ator of 
AIS Electr onic Libr ary (AISeL). F or mor e information, please contact elibr ary@aisnet.or g. 
 Towa rds a Framework for Understanding Asset Tokenization  
  
Twenty -fifth Pacific Asia Conference on Information Systems, Dubai , UAE, 2021      1 The Tokenization of Everything: Towards a 
Framew ork for Understanding the Potentials of 
Tokenized Assets  
Completed Research Paper  
Roger Heines  
University of St.Gallen,  
St.Gallen, Switzerland  
roger.heines@bei -sg.ch  Christian Dick  
University of St.Gallen,  
St.Gallen, Switzerland  
christian.dick@alumni.unisg.ch   
 
Christian Pohle  
University of St.Gallen,  
St.Gallen, Switzerland  
christian.pohle@hsgalumni.ch  Reinhard Jung  
University of St.Gallen,  
St.Gallen, Switzerland  
reinhard.jung@unisg.ch  
Abstract  
By enabling a new way to digitize transactions, distributed ledger technology allows to 
fundamentally change how value is digitally issued, transferred, and stored. Accordingly, 
«tokenization» refers to the concept of crea ting a singular identifier on a distributed ledger 
in terms of a token that may represent anything from financial assets, goods, to other 
valuable resources. Where tokenization may disrupt our economic system leading to more 
efficiency or democracy, it is required to gain insights and facilitate the development of use 
cases associated with this concept. To illustrate how firms can apply  tokenization to 
innovate their businesses, we propose a framework of different token properties , drivers, 
and barriers for  adoption based on  literature and expert interviews and present eight 
archetyp ical cases  derived from an analysis of 129 ventures. This work provides strategic 
guidance in a token economy and a starting point  for future research of viable applications . 
Keywords: Tokenization, Token Economy, Distributed Ledger Technology  
Introduction  
Without relying on mediation by trusted third parties, distributed ledger technology (DLT) provides a 
new technological paradigm in the operation of highly available, tamper -resistant distributed databases 
for transactions (Beck et al. 2017) . Besides widely discussed implications for innovative information 
systems, the concept of «tokenization» has emerged in recent years by following DLT’s basic abilities 
to enable a system for the management of asset ownership of unique digital representations (Hrga et al. 
2020) . In this context, tokenization refers to the process of creating a singular identifier on a distributed 
ledger in form of a token . A unique and persistent reference can be established to digitally represent 
anything that ranges from financial assets and goods to other valuable resources (Harwood -Jones 2019) . 
It is assumed that the issuance, transfer, and storage of token on decentralized platforms reduce the 
drawbacks of intermediaries (e.g., single points of failures, lagging processing times). Especially the 
digital representation of bankable assets (e.g., stocks, bonds) has become a promising use case, where 
the Financial Times estimates that DLT -driven market infrastructures may save asset managers up to 
$2.7 billion per year just in the process of buying and selling funds (Mooney 2018) . 
 Towa rds a Framework for Understanding Asset Tokenization  
  
Twenty -fifth Pacific Asia Conference on Information Systems, Dubai , UAE, 2021      2 Where many projects focus on the issuance of tokenized  financial  assets (Sazandrishvili 2020) , it is also 
assumed that tokenization may serve as an enabler for new services and frictionless collaboration in a 
novel type of economy, a so -called token economy (Sunyaev et al. 2021) . Accordingly, tokenization 
can be extended and utilized for many other purposes within a system and is not primarily limited to 
the transfer of ownership of tradea ble objects. Unique  tokens might be used as a means of tracking and 
tracing  for a  more transparent  product lifecycle  (e.g., food, pharmaceuticals) (Madhwal 2020) . The  
access  to servic es can be tokenized, letting the holder use a car sharing platform once a specific token 
is acquired. Organization s can issue a limited amount  of tokens for licensing digital content or other 
digitized resources (Zhou et al. 2019) . In each  of these  cases  the role and reason  for using tokenized 
assets  can differ (e.g., improved  transparency, increased  liquidity)  and extend s the perspective  on 
individual token design  (e.g., native token, non-fungib le token ) (Oliveira et al. 2018) . Although the 
technic al feasibility of the concept has been broadly tested at prototype stage (e.g., transfer of bonds),  
expected adoption in established industries has not kept pace with the huge amounts of investments 
(Grilo and Zutshi 2020) . While everything from art, real estate even oceans or stars may be tokenized, 
risks  and legal aspects of use case s have to be considered  (Sazandrishvili 2020) . Decision  makers  are 
required to align their activities by identifying  not only potential s but also  weaknesses  of a DLT -project  
(Naqvi and Hussain 2020) . To the best of our knowledge, e xisting decis ion-aid tools  (e.g.,  token 
standards)  have fallen short to take these  factors into account  and lack strategic guidance  for successful  
use case desig n and token -based business model  development (Harwood -Jones 2019) .  
Especially for practitioners, the possibilities to create novel products and services seem endless and add  
complexity in assessing  new business opportunities . For this concept to work, knowledge is required 
that defines  what a token  offers  to represent , what tokenization enables , and which decentralized 
platform  requirements  have to be considered  (Zachariadis et al. 2019) . Previous research  associated 
with tokenization focus mainly on two separated streams: Approaches to describe a token  and general 
applicability of  tokenization . The first topic deals with a range of different classifications to distinguish 
cryptoassets from one another. Some publications establish a common knowledge base for 
categorization and design (Freni et al. 2020; Oliveira et al. 2018)  but neglect the study of broader 
implications. With regards to the second topic, there are only limited contributions that investigate value 
drivers or barriers. Mostly, they refer to industry -specific applications in banking (Sazandrishvili 2020)  
or supply chain management (Babich and Hilary 2020) . It remains unclear how to address applicability 
between specific tokenized objects (e.g., financial assets, physical goods) in a particular scenario (e.g., 
increased liquidity, reduced costs). To cover the wide r ange of use cases  offered by a token economy 
and identify the role of a token as part of a n operating and business model, it is required to unify both 
research streams.  By extending the understanding beyond descriptive token design , we address criteria 
for an assessment framework to support  organizations in t his decision -making and selection process  
through  the following research question : What are criteria  for assessing asset tokenization use cases 
and which archetypical asset tokenization use cases exist?  
We applied a three -step research approach to develop a framework and to derive archetypes  of this 
application area. At first, we carried out a literature review and analysis (Braun and Clarke 2006; 
Webster and Watson 2002)  to establish an understanding about token -based solutions. Secondly, we 
conducted semi -structured interviews with 22 participants (e.g., C -level executives, pro duct managers 
from Banking and FinTechs) following the recommendations by Ayres (2008)  to refine the findings for 
our final framework. Lastly, we sampled a database of 129 firms in this field and derived eight 
empirically founde d archetypes on basis of the identified criteria.  
With our study, we contribute to practice as the framework allows a first assessment of use cases and, 
thus, facilitates decision making for the selection of viable applications. We contribute to research b y 
synthesizing existing approaches and generating new means through empirical data. Therefore, our 
research serves as a foundation for new solutions and adoption towards a token economy. The remainder 
of this work is organized as follows. First, we introdu ce the domain background and current state of 
research. Second, we explain our research design applied in the development of the framework and 
derivation of archetyp ical use cases . Third, we present the identified criteria for assessment and 
generated arch etypes. Finally, we discuss our findings, implications for both practice and research, as 
well as limitations, and present an outlook for future research.  
 Towa rds a Framework for Understanding Asset Tokenization  
  
Twenty -fifth Pacific Asia Conference on Information Systems, Dubai , UAE, 2021      3 Background  
The Tokenization Concept  
Many transactions involve trusted third parties as a necessity to authenticate a transfer of ownership 
(e.g., international bank transfers) between unknown participants. These operations are often associated 
with increased costs, time -consuming processes, and the exposure to a single point of failure. To 
overcome such challenges, DLT can be utilized to ensure the integrity of transactions in a decentral 
manner. Basically, it enables an append -only distributed database characterized by high tamper 
resistance  in untrustworthy environments, known as byzantine fault tolerance (Kannengießer et al. 
2020) . Cryptocurrencies represent a known application, where its features allow a peer -to peer transfer 
of ownership without challenging the legitimacy of the transaction through a third party (Nakamoto 
2008) . According to new DLT frameworks (e.g., Ethereum), advance d features enabled a new form of 
crowdfunding in the past. So -called, initial coin offerings (ICO), introduced “tokens” to be sold in 
exchange for cryptocurrencies to investors seeking public investments for their company in return (Roth 
et al. 2019) . As a known concept in non -DLT systems, tokens are utilized within closed environments 
such as casino chips, laundry credits or for IT access (Oliveira et al. 2018) . Thus, DLT -based token 
further developed into an instrument to digitize  anything that may represent an asset, utility or 
ownership due to their usefulness in their respective field. Pilkington (2015)  highlights the purpose of 
tokens as ideal value containers for divisibility, ease -of-use, and facilitated trade. In this context, the 
concept of asset tokenization has gained growing attentio n. Research and practice defines the term and 
its surrounding environment in various, sometimes conflicting ways. Where Babich and Hilary (2020)  
mention tokenization to create ownership rights for trade facilitation across the supply chain, Zhou et 
al. (2019)  addresses the concept to convert data for a secure handling in an IT -system. In fact, the terms 
‘digital assets’ and ‘cryptoassets’ are also synonymously used to describe token that are mostly 
associated with an investment purpose (OECD 2020) . Where an asset is primary defined  as anything 
that has value to a certain stakeholder (Greer 1997) , it is important to gain a deeper understanding of 
asset tokenization that goes beyond the mer e representation of financial and monetary value.  
According to the various meanings, tokenization can be initially described as the process of creating a 
token on a shared ledger in terms of a singular identifier that enables a unique and persistent refer ence. 
Dependent on the features of the underlying DLT, the token relies on a specific data structure and 
implemented logic to achieve a desired functionality (Roth et al. 2019) . As ever ything may be 
represented by creating such reference, we define a token as a cryptographically secured digital 
representation of value or contractual rights (Distefano et al. 2020) . A token may be then distinguished 
by serving as a bearer instrument (e.g., liability between issuer and owner), once a legal  relationship is 
established and a specific bearer is assigned to that right (e.g., ownership rights embedded into a smart 
contract). By adding individual properties of an asset into a token, it can be designed to be unique, 
tradeable, scarce, and much more. From a practical perspective, a difference must be further drawn 
between tokenized assets that exist “off -chain” and “on -chain”. The tokenization of a “physical asset” 
that exists “off -chain” relies on an underlying object (e.g., digital twin of a ca r). Such systems differ 
from native record keeping in which a “native” token is built “on -chain”. It is only existent within the 
system and derive s its value in and of themselves (e.g., Bitcoin) (OECD 2020) .  
Applicability of Tokenization  
There is a substantial body of knowledge that mainly refers to grey literature, but only f ew scientific 
contributions investigate the distinct driver and barrier for adoption. Narayan and Tidström (2020)  
explore the usage of tokens in building a circular economy to facilitate coopetition. In this context, 
tokenization creates an effective incentive mechanism to generate ideas and scale up innovation 
between disconnected product platforms. Lotti (2019)  investigates the features of tokenization for the 
art market and its potential for disintermediation. By rethi nking the social relations and interactions in 
art production, art tokens may create new opportunities for digital design incentivized by so -called 
crypto economics. Beside these benefits in governance, the adoption of tokenization is primarily 
motivated b y economic reasons. By overcoming the drawbacks related  to costly intermediation, the 
concept improves the security of business processes and increases the usability in transaction handling. 
 Towa rds a Framework for Understanding Asset Tokenization  
  
Twenty -fifth Pacific Asia Conference on Information Systems, Dubai , UAE, 2021      4 Zhou et al. (2019)  converts medical data into on -chain tokens to establish a safe and efficient data 
exchange. Babich and Hilary (2020)  apply digital claim tokens in supply chain management for 
production, inventory, and financial controlling that enables a facilitated sha ring, trading, and exchange 
among multiple stakeholders. Especially a reduced need for third parties is considered highly disruptive 
for the financial sector and other industries (e.g., intellectual property, collectibles) (Sazandrishvili 
2020) . Indicated by the surge of projects and initiatives, most references focus on digital representations 
and management of asset ownership using tokens for existing bankable assets. As a corollary of DLTs 
basic capabilities, the possibilities for automation (e.g., smart contracts), transparent record keeping, 
and trusted reconciliation between parties are widely discussed in the context of financial market 
infrastructures (Hartung et al. 2019) . Shtybel (2019)  explores the benefits of tokenised private securities 
for improved issuance, trading, and settlement. Also, the impact of tokenized assets on liquidity for 
otherwise untradable asset classes is highlight ed (Harwood -Jones 2019) . Although the opportunities for 
DLT and asset tokenization seem promising, often new obstacles before mass adoption may occur. 
While some publications state that technical immaturity leads to use cases stuck at prototyping phase 
(Hughes et al. 2019) , other contributions assume that challenges in terms of governance, regulation, and 
operations need to be overcome to reach commercial adoption (Harwood -Jones 2019) . Especially legal 
aspects and transition risks relat ing to the issuance of digital securities must be appropriately evaluated 
against nationally binding law ( Savelyev 2018) . Existing research on the applicability of tokenization 
mainly focuses on general potentials and challenges and is limited to a few selected applications with a  
strong emphasis on the financial sector. While  various industries may benefit from this concep t, it still 
remains unclear how to address the se multifaceted  use cases . Here, i t would be appreciated to establish 
a common understanding and to provide a basis for strategic guidance  in this highly innovative  area. 
Token Properties  
Although the potentia ls of cryptocurrencies have been extensively discussed in literature, there is still 
a lack of consensus on what a token might represent (OECD 2020) . To close this gap, a review has been 
conducted to highlight relevant token properties. Oliveira et al. (2018)  propo ses a token classification 
with four dimensions: purpose, governance, functional, technical groupings based on previous research 
and empirical data. Another categorization is presented by Euler (2018) , where token are allocated along 
five groupings: purpose, utility, legal  status, underlying value, and technical layer. According to these 
classifications, archetypes were further identified by mapping tokens against those parameters (Oliveira 
et al. 2018) . A comprehensive approach of specific attributes and features is presented by Freni et al. 
(2020) . With regards to a morphological framework, the shift from economics towards a token economy 
and the token’s key role within these ecosystems is analyzed. A stronger industry focus is p resented by 
integrating token characteristics into traditional finance (Ankenbrand et al. 2020) . The taxonomy 
consists of selected attributes to clas sify tokens (e.g., claim structure, total supply, redemption). 
Interestingly, it can be stated that the perspective on token slowly shifts from crypto currency driven use 
cases (e.g., ICO) towards more comprehensive token standards to set the basis for ente rprises with a 
more diverse and wide view of tokens for existing economic models (e.g., tokens for private DLTs). 
Beside academia, there are a couple of industry -oriented classifications that add regulatory and utility -
driven aspects for a practical implem entation of tokenization solutions. Mueller et al. (2018)  
distinguishes three major classes in terms of native utility, counterparty, or ownership token. The 
International Token Standardization Associa tion (ITSA) establishes a common understanding on basis 
of a classification along the four dimensions purpose, industry, technological setup and legal claim 
(Ketz and Sandner 2019) . Another initiative represents the InterWorkAlliance that drives standards for 
interoperability. By defining the most industry relevant token prop erties in predefined application areas 
(e.g., financial services, healthcare), a technical foundation for cross platforms is established to bridge 
the gap between different stakeholders (e.g., developer s, business executives) based on similar technical 
features and token behaviours. Most of the frameworks reduce complexity for redundant dimensions 
and associated attributes. Strongly dependant on a business -, regulatory - or technically oriented 
perspective, a harmonization of the terminology and standardizat ion of artifacts may help to overcome 
potential confusion and expand over time. However, previous research has fallen short to provide a 
framework that defines the unique business value of use cases in the context of respective token 
characteristics and  to empirically derive wider  implications of tokenization.  
 Towa rds a Framework for Understanding Asset Tokenization  
  
Twenty -fifth Pacific Asia Conference on Information Systems, Dubai , UAE, 2021      5 Research Method  
Literature Review  
To generate an initial set of criteria for tokenized objects and to define the applicability of tokenization 
as part of a n operating and business model, we started the development of our framework by means of 
a structured literature review following Webster and Watson (2002) . We used the scientific databases 
EBSCOhost, IEEEXplore, AISeL, Science Direct, ProQuest, and ACM Digital Library in September 
2020 and defined the following search string  (“Blockchain*” OR “Distributed Ledger*”) AND 
(“Token*). To increase  topicality, we included a title and abstract search with the term s (“Tokenization” 
OR “Tokenisation”). The search resulted in 214 documents. We identified the publications relevant to 
answer our research question and excluded irrelevant papers as well as duplicates. After the full-text 
screening, the remaining 23 documents represented the basis for a subsequent forward and backward 
search to enhance theoretical contributions with a practical perspective. At the end we selected 34 
publications. To identify themes for a distinct assessment of use cases, we applied thematic analysis 
(Braun and Clarke 2006) . According to the six phases ( familiarization, initial code generation, search 
for themes, review themes, define and name themes, and report  generation), we selected relevant (1) 
token attributes, functions, and properties; (2) drivers, potentials, and value propositions of tokenization 
as well as (3) challenges, limitations, and barriers for adoption. Where the themes represent preliminary 
dimensions of the f ramework, we refined the results in discussion rounds with researchers. We omitted 
highly technical features (i.e., burnability, e xpirability, issuance), adapted criteria for applicability (e.g., 
real-time processing, process automation) and grouped simila r aspects for evaluation (e.g., facilitated 
access, democratization). Within this iteration, we derived 21 dimensions with a set of 76 sub -criteria.  
Semi -structured Interviews  
Based on the initial framework, we conducted two semi -structured interview roun ds to complement our 
findings and to validate our results (cf. Table 1). All interviewees were either subject matter experts or 
C-level managers familiar with the concept of tokenization or participating in the development of such 
DLT -driven solutions. Des pite a focus on the financial sector, we brought together interview partners 
from interdisciplinary backgrounds to widely represent the current state of the tokenization ecosystem.  
Table 1. Interview Overview  
 
At first, we aimed for a clear understanding towards the problem domain. The questions addressed the 
overall phenomenon designed to identify additional potentials and challenges of tokenization illustrated 
as a basic theme in the framework. We noticed that  the experts highlighted similar aspects from our 
initial review (e.g., fractional ownership, legal issues). We adapted the structure of the interview guide 
and initiated a second interview round with the goal to directly validate the proposed criteria acc ording 
Interview Round Goal of the Interviews ID Function of the Interviewee Affiliation Company Size
B1 Head New Markets Bank Medium
D1 Co-Head Clients Digital Asset Bank Medium
D2 Head Token Platform Digital Asset Bank Medium
L1 Lawyer  &  Founder Legal & Regulatory Services Medium
L2 Swiss Senior Legal & Regulatory Expert Legal & Regulatory Services Large
F1 Co-Founder und Chief Investment Officer FinTech Small
P1 Head of Fintech IT-Provider Large 
P2 Manager Technology IT-Provider Large 
P3 Manager Tokenization Services IT-Provider Large
D3 CEO / Head of Crypto Payments Digital Asset Bank Medium
E1 Product Manager Exchange Large
2nd Interview Round S1 Business Development Start Up Small
D4 Chief Client Officer Digital Asset Bank Medium
F2 Chief Executive Officer & Founder FinTech Small
F3 Chief Executive Officer & Founder FinTech Small
B2 Project Manger Bank Large
R1 Researcher Research Medium
F4 Chief Sales Officer FinTech Medium
F5 Chief Executive Officer & Founder FinTech Small
D5 Head of Business Unit Digital Asset Bank Medium
F6 Chief Marketing Officer FinTech Medium
D6 	 Board of Directors Digital Asset Bank MediumReevaluation of prior 
results, refinement of the 
framework and identification 
of tokenization use casesUnderstanding of the 
problem domain, 
identification of value 
potentials and barriers of 
tokenization1st Interview Round 
 Towa rds a Framework for Understanding Asset Tokenization  
  
Twenty -fifth Pacific Asia Conference on Information Systems, Dubai , UAE, 2021      6 to a solution artifact. The experts actively reflected the categories and discussed use cases from their 
domains. In total, we conducted 22 interviews and started the analysis of the results following Gioia et 
al. (2013) . We establ ished first and second level codes to identify confirmatory aspects towards our 
framework. Accordingly, we added new dimensions on token properties (e.g., token supply), aggregated 
sub-criteria on token representations (i.e., digital, physical, contract) a nd merged redundant aspects 
(e.g., technical complexity associated with oracle problems). This iteration resulted in the final 
framework illustrated in Table 2, where we conclude 12 dimensions with a set of 44 sub -criteria.  
Deriving Archetypes  
For the third phase, we applied the framework as an analytical tool (e.g., morphological box) to derive 
archetypical  use cases  on basis of a company analysis. This problem -solving technique is used for multi -
dimensional questions, where an instantiation is assigne d to its specific parameters in a grid box 
(Zwicky  1969) . For the data collection, we conducted a screening in December 2020 for companies on 
crunchbase.org, chaineurope.org, and e -foresight.ch. The focus of our selection was on DLT and 
Blockchain based firms in German -speaking Europe (i.e., Germany, A ustria, Switzerland, 
Liechtenstein) representing a viable ecosystem around tokenization. The initial database contained 183 
company profiles as we considered additional sources (i.e., company website, whitepaper, press reports) 
to ensure data quality for t he subsequent analysis. We included only firms that utilize tokenization as 
an integral part of their operating and business model (e.g., token issuance services, asset tokenizer). 
We excluded wallet providers, cryptocurrency exchanges, miners, or broader DLT -infrastructures (e.g., 
Ethereum) because their usage of tokens are not primarily driven by a tokenized representation 
associated with a specific product or service. Next, we assigned coding schemes to assess the companies 
according to the predefined cr iteria of the framework and omitted cases that resulted in insufficient 
information. We validated the instantiations in various iterations, where disputes were resolved in group 
discussions (Strauss 1987) . The direct instantiation s highlighted  recurring  combinations of criteria 
implying  a tendency of companies with similar tokenization us e case s. As a result, we identified eight 
archetypes (see Appendix) and demonstrated utility of the framework covering a final set of 129 firms.  
Assessment Framework for the Tokenization of Assets  
Given the identified token properties, value drivers, and barriers for tokenization, we present a 
comprehensive framework to be applied in the description and assessment of use cases associated with  
asset tokenization.  Described below, the resulting framework consists of 12 dimension and 44 sub -
criteria along the three ov erarching themes allowing for a distinct analysis, comparison, and discussion.  
Table 2. Framework for the Assessment of Tokenization Use Cases  
Industry  
Focus  Financial & 
Insurance 
Activities  Prof., Sc. & 
Technical 
Activities  Blockchain -
Specific 
Application  Transport & 
Storage  Arts, Enter -
tainment & 
Recreation  Wholesale & 
Retail Trade  Information 
& Commun.  Public Adm. 
& Defence  
Tokenized  
Representation  e.g., Art  e.g., Gold  e.g., Votes  e.g., Shares  e.g., Membership  
Underlying  
Representation  Digital  Physical  Contract  
Function  Access to a 
Service  On-Chain 
Reward 
Potential  Off-Chain 
Cash Flow & 
Dividend  Store of Value  Collectibles  Means of 
Exchange  Voting Right  
Purpose  Payment Tokens  Utility Tokens  Asset Tokens  
Unit Fractional  Whole  Singleton  
Tradability  Transferable  Non-Transferable  
Fungibility  Fungible  Non-Fungible  
Supply  Fixed  Unfixed  
Technical Setup  Ledger Native  Ledger Non -Native  
Driver of 
Tokenization  Democratization &  
Facilitated Access  Increased 
Liquidity  Disintermediation  Increased  
Transparency  Process  
Optimization  Digital Scarcity  
Barriers of 
Tokenization  Legacy Structures &  
Transition Risk  Data Privacy  Regulatory & Legal  Governance Issues  Oracle Problem  
 Towa rds a Framework for Understanding Asset Tokenization  
  
Twenty -fifth Pacific Asia Conference on Information Systems, Dubai , UAE, 2021      7 Token Properties  
• Industry Classification:  a token can be described based on the industry of the use case. UK 
Standard Industry Classification (SIC) is applied (e.g., Financial and Insurance Activities, 
Professional, Scientific and Technical Activities) (Marshall et al. 2018) . 
• Tokeni zed Representation:  specifies the reference, value or proxy of the tokenized 
representation in particular such as art, gold, credit loans, baseball bards, etc.  
• Underlying Representation: indicates the superordinate category with regards to the 
underlying c ollateral or generic nature of the token -based asset: digital (e.g., bankable  assets , 
cryptoassets ), physical (e.g., real estate) or contract (e.g., usage right)  (Oliveira et al. 2018) . 
• Function:  the reason  for holding tokenized assets is based on the function or target use of a 
token: access to a service, on -chain reward potential (e.g., staking, airdrops), off -chain cash 
flow (e.g., dividends), store of value (e.g., stablecoins, gold), collectibles with in trinsic value 
(e.g., CryptoKitties), means of exchange (e.g., currency), voting right  (Marshall et al. 2018) . 
• Purpose:  classifies the underlying economic purpose of a token into payment token (e.g., 
Bitcoin), utility token (e.g., Ether), and asset token (e.g., Crowdlitoken)  (Mueller et al. 2018) . 
• Unit:  indicates whether a token is sub -divisible into smaller fraction (fractional or partial, 
whole with no subdivision, singleton with a quantity of one) (InterWorkAlliance IWA 2020) . 
• Transferability:  relates to the transferability of ownership to another party (e.g., sale of a 
registe red security)  (Oliveira et al. 2018) . 
• Fungib ility:  indicates whether a token can be interchanged. While a fungible token has 
interchangeable value with one another, a non -fungible token is unique and cannot be 
interchanged due to different values  (Oliveira et al. 2018) . 
• Total Supply:  describes to which limit a  number of  asset s can be generate d: fixed (e.g., 
capped), unfixed (e.g., based on predefined conditions, schedule -based supply or managed by 
authorized parties)  (Ankenbrand et al. 2020) . 
• Technical Setup : describes  on which layer (e.g.,  protocol -level ) of the distributed ledger a 
token is applied: native (e.g. , Bitcoin), non -native (e.g., ERC20) (Ketz and Sandner 2019) . 
Driver of  Tokenization  
We extend the perspective beyond token properties and consider applicability in terms of six distinct 
drivers of tokenization  to identify the role of a token as part of a n operating and business model. Each 
driver is to be selected, if one or  more of the following aspects explicitly applies:  
• Democratization & Facilitated Access refers to the degree of financial inclusion. While 
tokenization of real estate enables retail clients to participate in large scale real estate 
development projects an d therefore is highly correlated to this factor, a token to trace the 
provenance of items (e.g., diamonds)  is not.  
• Increased Liquidity:  through the release of untradeable or private assets (e.g., venture capital, 
real estate in certain market, collectibles such as wine, old -timers etc.) and 24/7 market access, 
tokenization helps to create liquidity and facilitates the trading and settlemen t (Harwood -Jones 
2019; Shtybel 2019)  
• Disintermediation:  tokenization has the potential to reduce the need for trusted intermediaries. 
Peer-to-peer trading and atomic settlemen t are examples of disintermediation in financial 
markets (Shtybel 2019) .  
• Increased Transparency:  tokenization increases transparency and traceability of token 
ownership (Shtybel 2019) . Single -source -of-truth can improve efficiency, correctness and 
coordination requirements significantly.  
• Process Optimization:  typical examples of process optimization through tokenizati on are 
corporate action (e.g., automated dividend payments through smart contracts) (Shtybel 2019) . 
• Digital Scarcity:  tokenization introduces the concept of scarcity or predictable supply to the 
digital domain, which contradicts the characteristics of digital medium such as mutability and 
copyability (Chen 2020; Lotti 2019; Macedo 2019)  
 Towa rds a Framework for Understanding Asset Tokenization  
  
Twenty -fifth Pacific Asia Conference on Information Systems, Dubai , UAE, 2021      8 Barrier of Tokenization  
We present further five main barriers of tokenization  describing identified challenges in adoption and 
implementation of token -based solutions. One or more of the following barriers may explicitly apply:  
• Legacy Structures & Transition Risk:  existing structures and legacy systems may represent 
a barrier when implementing use cases (e.g., core banking system, existing infrastructure).  
• Data Privacy:  depending on the business case the sensitivity to data privacy may vary and can 
even be in conflict with existing traditional security law (Shtybel 2019) . 
• Regulatory & Legal:  uncertainties originating from legal , regulatory and compliance. Limited 
enforceability, lack of global standards and slow adaption of regulation and law represent 
examples of potential legal barriers for tokenization (Savelyev 2 018). 
• Governance:  key aspects in token -enabled business models are new governance mechanisms. 
The extent of barriers might depend on the complexity of the underlying network, the number 
of involved partners in the ecosystem and applied incentive mechani sm. 
• Oracle Problem:  gates between the digital and physical world pose challenges in terms of 
security, authenticity and trust. The more a business case relies on off -chain data, the higher its 
correlation to this factor. Barriers may vary the number of dif ferent sources, existence and 
design of technical interface, audit, and quality requirements.  
Dependencies between Token Properties, D rivers, and Barriers of Tokenization  
The analysis of 129 firms highlighted recurring combinations of criteria  and allowed us to draw 
conclusions on various  dependencies . For example, we found that bankable assets are often combined 
with fractionality to enable increased liquidity. To derive archetypes, we structured these dependencies 
according to their level of a bstraction and referred to the tokenized representation at first to examine 
the interrelationships between properties, drivers, and barriers in the respective case.  Our findings 
revealed that the tokenization of physical assets (e.g., real estate, artwork)  is manly driven by the 
financial sector, logistics, and arts industry. While tokenized commodities were utilized for track and 
tracing, tokenized paintings were further applied for provenance and authenticity. However, high value 
assets (e.g., gold, watch es) are mainly tokenized for specific investment purposes. This pattern is also 
highlighted by the majority of other products that already exist in a digitized form (e.g., bankable 
assets). Regarding shares and bonds, a fractional, tradable, and fungible t oken design is required. They 
fulfill the function to exchange and store value and enable off -chain or on chain reward potentials. 
Tokenized contracts (e.g., voting, usage rights) show strong dependency towards service and platform 
access for various indus tries. The ownership of such utility token does not only grant general access but 
also provides discounts and participation in decision -making processes. They are characterized by 
fungibility, flexible supply, and transferability between holders. Other uti lity token exist that provide 
individual asset ownership (e.g., digital twins, identities). Assigned to a unique bearer, they follow a 
capped token supply and a non -fungible design. Also for collectibles (e.g., luxury cars) a unique 
reference is establishe d through non -fungibility, as transferability and fractionality is not desirable. 
Tokenized virtual items on basis of a capped supply (e.g., digital gaming cards) enable further 
ownership and possession for a limited series of objects. Where fungible and t radable token are mainly 
represented through non -native DLT -frameworks (e.g., ERC -20), non -fungible token may require 
extended functionality and application access and refer more often to proprietary DLT -systems.   
Democratization and facilitated access is highly associated with the tokenization of physical assets, 
whereas the correlation with tokenized contracts is somewhat less pronounced. Some interrelations  
highlight the potentials to minimize investment amounts of non -bankable assets typically considere d 
illiquid (e.g., watches, wine). But also tokenized equity and loans increase financial inclusion for a 
broader investor base through fractionality (e.g., peer -to-peer lending). Beside these benefits in product 
innovation, it is assumed that the financial  sector is further driven by process optimization and increased 
transparency. This dependency refers specifically to automation of administrative tasks and a tamper 
resistant asset ownership of transactions. Interestingly, the disintermediation of existing  structures is 
strongly pronounced for native digital currencies as a means of exchange (e.g., stablecoins). However, 
these aspects can be neglected for tokenized contracts. Where accessibility to services is a prerequisite, 
 Towa rds a Framework for Understanding Asset Tokenization  
  
Twenty -fifth Pacific Asia Conference on Information Systems, Dubai , UAE, 2021      9 the use of tokens is driven by process innovation. This combination is also identified for life cycle 
tracking of physical objects. To provide provenance (e.g., artwork, diamonds), increased transparency 
is highly appreciated. To prevent replication of tokenized assets, digital scarcity  is further introduced 
on basis of a fixed token supply. Accordingly, a non -fungible and singleton token design with less 
pronunciation on fractional ownership and increased liquidity is required.   
By taking a closer look at the barriers, we need to disti nguish between transformational and enabling 
capabilities of tokenization. Especially for existing bankable assets, a seamless integration into legacy 
system is often required and poses a transition risk for implementation. On the contrary, physical 
tradab le assets show only low to no correlation towards compliant legacy systems. It is assumed that a 
functional market infrastructure is not established yet and that such use cases offer high potential for 
new products and services. Use cases for the transfer of asset ownership and tokenization of financial 
asset classes (e.g., shares, currencies) require further a regulatory basis. While common law often refers 
to known legal structures, the legislation for a dematerialization of a fully digitized asset owners hip is 
often not established yet (e.g., legal assertion of smart contracts). Where token solely provide access to 
a service platform (e.g., tokenized goods in logistics) or serve as a basis for non -fungible collectibles 
(e.g., trading cards) a legal framew ork is not necessarily required. Some use cases show increased 
requirements for data privacy. Tokenized health data, for instance, may rely on restricted permission 
for monitoring sensible transactions. Additional complexity is added when new actors have t o be 
coordinated or incentivized to join a decentral platform. A minimal viable ecosystem is often necessary 
that consist of additional stakeholders (e.g., asset tokenizer, custodian). With regards to physical 
representations (e.g., watches, container), a consistent data connection between the physical and digital 
world is appreciated. Especially for unique non -fungible token, this oracle problem has to be considered.  
Archetypical Use Cases for Asset Tokenization  
We present eight archetypical use cases c overing the different manifestations for tokenization among 
the analyzed sample of firms (cf. Figure 1). They represent similar configurations of parameters to be 
understood as recurring applications in existing operating and business models (see Appendix) .  
Figure 1. Asset Tokenization Archetypes  
Primarily driven by the financial industry, programmable money  represents applications associated 
with tokenized currency (e.g., stablecoins, central bank digital currencies) for an efficient means of 
exchange and store of value. By overcoming drawback of existing applications, payment tokens highly 
optimize processe s and make it possible to trigger events and automate a multitude of services on 
automated decentralized platforms (e.g., micropayments). However, governance between stakeholders 
(e.g., central and commercial banks) and the adaptation of a legal framework,  increase transition risks 
as centralized solutions already exists. Smart bankable assets  are driven by similar aspects in terms of 
process optimization and investment rewards potentials. By implementing a financial contract logic, 
recurring cash flows and  voting rights can be automated. Also market accessibility as well as the usage 
of tradable and fungible asset token increases transparency and liquidity. The integration into existing 
legacy systems and complexity of such market structures pose a risk, wh ere legal and regulatory 
foundations are slowly established. Beside transformational aspects, the opening of illiquid assets 
focuses on the creation of token as a proxy for physical value. Due to the increased efficiency delivered 

 Towa rds a Framework for Understanding Asset Tokenization  
  
Twenty -fifth Pacific Asia Conference on Information Systems, Dubai , UAE, 2021      10 by the digitalization pro cess, representations of real estate or classic cars add additional accessibility by 
design. The fractionalized investment denominations of token may decrease market friction. Arranged 
at low amounts, access is provided to a much broader investors base to increase liquidity. However, the 
complex network of actors and required external data through oracles needs to be considered. Another, 
more specialized, form of democratization is represented by crowd funding . Emerged in form of ICOs, 
such applications are  characterized by reduced transaction costs through elimination of external service 
providers. Where many associated business models were not economically viable before, tokens allow 
efficient, fractionized, real -time crowd investments ranging from private  projects to participation in 
venture capital. A focus lies on fast and flexible tradability as basis for increased liquidity. However, 
obstacles remain for establishing such regulated market infrastructures and to incentivize the usage 
among stakeholders.  Defined as service access , many use cases utilize tokens as an instrument for 
acquiring rights to a specific service. Implemented by various industries, tokenized licenses or 
memberships allow a facilitated and effective access to decentralized platforms.  They are categorized 
according to the functions a token grants to the holder (i.e., general -, exclusive -, DLT -infrastructure 
access). Both fungibility and non -fungibility may be implemented to assign a unique private or public 
functionality. Unlike other cases, the tokens are not regulated at all. The services offered are solely 
depending on the provider and pose challenges for governance and implementation of external data 
sources. Platform governance  represents a more abstract field of use cases for toke nizing incentive 
mechanisms as a means of coordination and cooperation. Embedded into a DLT protocol, tokens are 
issued as a reward to users for completing specific tasks or meeting a certain behavior (e.g., mining 
reward for transaction validation). Besid e DLT -specific means of consensus, a token may also be 
demanded and valued on its own to further incentivize community building or voting. They are not 
primarily based on future monetarization but have social value by governing voting power and creating 
community sense. Democratization, process optimization, disintermediation, data privacy (e.g., 
pseudonymity, anonymity) and increased complexity are characteristic of such use cases. While DLT 
enables verifiable digital scarcity, we introduce digital soverei gnty for applications that require unique 
representations and decentralized data access control for token holder in their own right (e.g., digital 
identities). Once implemented as a non -fungible token, the assets provide proof of authenticity and 
cannot be  replicated by one governing entity. This democratization of interaction on decentralized 
platforms allows users to control in -game assets, for instance, independently from a single platform 
owner (e.g., CryptoKitties). Referring to the tokenization of uni que physical assets or sensible data, data 
privacy and a secure link between the physical and the digital object have to be considered. At last, 
track & tracing  is used to establish a tamper -proof -record of ownership among various stakeholders. 
Such use ca ses are often associated with logistical processes in many industries and allow organizations 
to utilize token for increased transparency along the lifecycle of tangible or intangible assets. Where 
tokenized consumer goods may take on fungible properties, non-fungible token are appreciated for high 
value items. Especially for provenance across supply chains, external data authenticity and integration 
into legacy systems must be considered . Several combinations between archetypes have been further 
identified . For example, use cases in supply chain finance that rely on both, track and tracing as wells 
as the opening of illiquid assets. As one archetype exhibits a main purpose, there might be additional 
purposes which are combinable and may extend token utility  in a decentralized system.  
Discussion  
Given the increasing interest in asset tokenization, t his work  proposes a  first qualitative framework that 
provides a n understanding about the practicability  of this application area  by identifying relevant 
criteria for assessment , comparison , and  documentation of use cases. To identify the role of tokenized 
representations as part of a broader business model, we extended the perspective beyond token 
properties and integrated selected aspects of applicability  on basis of a literature review and expert 
interviews (i.e., drivers and barriers of tokenization ). Our empirical data confirmed our initial 
assumptions that the same tokenized object can exhibit a multipurpose ability for different use cases.  
We further applied the framework in a structured comparison process based on a sample of companies 
associated with tokenization. Following our morphological approach, the different instantiations 
allowed us to further identify dependencies between the different dimen sions and criteria to highlight 
similarities. Given the dataset, we propose eight archetyp ical use cases . Moreover, our study revealed 
 Towa rds a Framework for Understanding Asset Tokenization  
  
Twenty -fifth Pacific Asia Conference on Information Systems, Dubai , UAE, 2021      11 that assessing the applicability of asset tokenization  requires an interdisciplinary  and multifaceted  
approach . The invol ved criteria uncover a range of various possibilities , strengths , and weaknesses  on 
an abstract basis and represent  a first set of formal descriptions for the design  and development of uses 
cases  and token -based business model s. In assisting businesses to align their activities and assess 
potential trade -offs, applicability between the drive s and barriers  of a specific asset tokenization use 
case ha s to be illustrated in the first place . These two dimensions  of the  framework help to judge 
feasibility  and to discern the pros and cons . Subsequently, the token propert y dimensions  further specify  
the unique business value of a use case in the context of respective token characteristics and provid e 
additional aspects  from a business standpoint  to clarify scenarios at the backdrop of token design . We 
regard the framework also as an initial approach for the operationalization of the tokenization concept . 
Although the development of a quantitative decision model is beyon d the scope of this study, the 
identified dimensions  may be weighted  individually to improve  an assessment.  It could be shown that 
an additional perspective on applicability in terms of drivers and barriers is required to evaluate the role 
of tokens in a p articular scenario . Designed to remain as simple as possible, we were further able to 
capture significant meaning by representing the current state of the tokenization ecosystem in terms of 
archetypical use cases. Finally, our results suggest that there is a huge potential o ffered by a token 
economy that is not limited to the tokenization of assets in the  financial sector . 
Implications  
The presented findings contribute to practice in two ways. Firstly, the framework allows strategists and 
managers to support a comparison of use cases associated with asset  tokenization helping  to assess  the 
potential in the context of different token desi gns, drivers, and barriers for adoption. By defining  
applicability according to  the predefined criteria, the framework may be utilized as a decision -aid tool 
to develop and compare viable solutions for different tokenized objects  and improve managerial 
practices for entering this highly innovative area . Secondly, the identified dependencies and archetypes 
highlight  the usability of the  framework and reduce  complexity by providing an overview of ma jor 
differences in existing token -based solutions . They provi de strategic guidance in the design of tangible 
applications  and illustrate how firms can a pply this concept to innovate their businesses towards a token 
economy . Even though various classifications exist and are applied in practice , we observed that the 
tokenization domain is still heavily influenced by grey literature and that most frameworks are primarily 
geared towards cryptoassets (e.g., ITSA) without really examining  new roles of token s as part of a n 
operating and business model . So far, there has been no overview about tokenization use cases that 
involves relevant  factors  for analysis (e.g., increased liquidity, governance issues) . Accordingly,  this 
study contributes to  this gap through the synthesis  of the research foci  token description  and 
applicability of tokenization . Our contributions to research are t hree-fold. First, we extend the e xisting 
knowledge base beyond token classifications by generating new empirical insights about existing use 
cases. Secondly, the archetypes serve as a cornerstone for the development of feasible solutions and 
may foster research on interdisciplinary applications in other industr ies. Thirdly, we support the multi -
perspective discussion  on the opportunities of a token economy . By combining the requirement s of 
established industries with the disruptive innovations of its fast -moving open -source  community , we 
may further  establish a  common understanding from a technological  and economic perspective.  
Limitation and future research  
As the framework is initially based on scientific literature, we cannot generalize the presented findings 
without limitation. Some of the identified driver s and barriers stem from a very new phenomenon that 
highlight the need to enhance data collection using grey literature and more practical sources. Therefore, 
it cannot be claimed that the proposed framework is complete nor stops the need for further resea rch at 
this intersection. Exhaustive and mutually exclusive principles associated with a structured approach to 
building a taxonomy were therefore neglected. Also limitations of the interview process have to be 
considered. The chosen experts may have found  it difficult to verbalize feedback on the proposed 
framework. Especially interviewees with profound knowledge in banking and finance showed a 
stronger bias towards aspects associated with the tokenization of bankable assets in comparison to other 
industri es. However, we considered this subjective interpretation by constantly reflecting our interim 
 Towa rds a Framework for Understanding Asset Tokenization  
  
Twenty -fifth Pacific Asia Conference on Information Systems, Dubai , UAE, 2021      12 findings by the introduction of two broader discussion rounds. Due to the fast dynamics in this field, 
we cannot claim general transferability of the archetypes but rather indicate the status quo of a 
prevailing tokenization ecosystem. By design, there is a notable overlap of groupings. V alidation is 
therefore pivotal to improve ambiguity and inconsistencies during the coding process. Nevertheless, the 
findings pr ovide a first useful foundation with relevant distinctions and characteristics. In future 
research, efforts should be made by generating further insights using longitudinal data or case study 
approaches. Potentially, this will improve the understanding of token -based  business model associated 
with tokenization and might lead to an extension of the framework with additional metrics and 
operationalizations  (e.g., weighted sum model) . New companies may follow with entirely new services 
and products than the o nes included in our dataset. With an emergence of new projects and players, it 
is not unlikely that the vast majority of assets will be digitized in the near future.  
References  
Ankenbrand, T., Bieri, D., Cortivo, R., Hoehener, J., and Hardjono, T. 2020. “Proposal for a 
Comprehensive (Crypto) Asset Taxonomy,” in 2020 Crypto Valley Conference on Blockchain 
Technology (CVCBT) , June, pp. 16 –26.  
Ayres, L. 2008. “Semi -Structured Interv iew,” in The SAGE Encyclopedia of Qualitative Research 
Methods , L. Given (ed.), Thousand Oaks, CA, USA: SAGE Publications, Inc., pp. 810 –811.  
Babich, V., and Hilary, G. 2020. “OM Forum —Distributed Ledgers and Operations: What Operations 
Management Researc hers Should Know About Blockchain Technology,” Manufacturing & Service 
Operations Management  (22:2), pp. 223 –240.  
Beck, R., Avital, M., Rossi, M., and Thatcher, J. B. 2017. “Blockchain Technology in Business and 
Information Systems Research,” Business & I nformation Systems Engineering  (59:6), pp. 381 –384.  
Braun, V., and Clarke, V. 2006. “Using Thematic Analysis in Psychology,” Qualitative Research in 
Psychology  (3:2), Routledge, pp. 77 –101.  
Chen, Y. 2020. “Information Integration in Libraries,” Library H i Tech  (38:1), pp. 210 –219.  
Distefano, B., Pocher, N., and Zichichi, M. 2020. “MOATcoin: Exploring Challenges and Legal 
Implications of Smart Contracts through a Gamelike DApp Experiment,” in Proceedings of the 3rd 
Workshop on Cryptocurrencies and Blockchains for Distributed Systems , CryBlock ’20, 
Association for Computing Machinery, September 25, pp. 53 –58.  
Euler, T. 2018. “The Token Classification Framework: A Multi -Dimensional Tool for Understanding 
and Classifying Crypto To kens.” Untitled INC , January 18. (http://www.untitled -inc.com/the -
token -classification -framework -a-multi -dimensional -tool-for-understanding -and-classifying -
crypto -tokens/, accessed July 27, 2020).  
Freni, P., Ferro, E., and Moncada, R. 2020. “Tokenization a nd Blockchain Tokens Classification: A 
Morphological Framework,” in 2020 IEEE Symposium on Computers and Communications , July, 
pp. 1 –6. 
Gioia, D. A., Corley, K., and Hamilton, A. L. 2013. “Seeking Qualitative Rigor in Inductive Research: 
Notes on the Gioia  Methodology,” Organizational Research Methods  (16:1), SAGE Publications 
Inc., pp. 15 –31.  
Greer, R. J. 1997. “What Is an Asset Class, Anyway?” The Journal of Portfolio Management  (23:2), 
Institutional Investor Journals Umbrella, pp. 86 –91.  
Grilo, A., and  Zutshi, A. 2020. “Preface for Special Issue on Blockchain and Tokenization for Industry 
and Services,” Computers & Industrial Engineering  (146), N.PAG -N.PAG.  
Hartung, G., Rutter, K., and Stroemer, G. 2019. “A Solution for Managing High -Quality Liquid Asse ts: 
How Distributed Ledger Technology Can Benefit the Securities Lending Market,” Journal of 
Securities Operations & Custody , p. 11.  
Harwood -Jones, M. 2019. “Digital and Crypto -Assets: Tracking Global Adoption Rates and Impacts 
on Securities Services,” Journal of Securities Operations & Custody , p. 10.  
Hrga, A., Capuder, T., and Žarko, I. P. 2020. “Demystifying Distributed Ledger Technologies: Limits, 
Challenges, and Potentials in the Energy Sector,” IEEE Access  (8), pp. 126149 –126163.  
Hughes, L., Dwivedi,  Y. K., Misra, S. K., Rana, N. P., Raghavan, V., and Akella, V. 2019. “Blockchain 
Research, Practice and Policy: Applications, Benefits, Limitations, Emerging Research Themes and 
Research Agenda,” International Journal of Information Management  (49), pp. 1 14–129.  
 Towa rds a Framework for Understanding Asset Tokenization  
  
Twenty -fifth Pacific Asia Conference on Information Systems, Dubai , UAE, 2021      13 InterWork Alliance IWA. 2020. “Token Taxonomy Framework Overview TTF,” GitHub , , May. 
(https://github.com/InterWorkAlliance/TokenTaxonomyFramework, accessed January 18, 2021).  
Kannengießer, N., Lins, S., Dehling, T., and Sunyaev, A. 2020. “Trade -Offs between Distributed 
Ledger Technology Characteristics,” ACM Computing Surveys  (53:2), pp. 1 –37.  
Ketz, C., and Sandner, P. 2019. “Market Standards for the Global Token Economy - International Token 
Standardization Association,” Medium , , July 16. (https://medium.com/@itsa_global/market -
standards -for-the-global -token -economy -7d9f3d0cde37, accessed January 18, 2021).  
Lotti, L. 2019. “The Art of Tokenization: Blockchain Affordances and the Invention of Future Milieus,” 
Media Theory  (3:1), Rethinking Affordance, Media Theory, pp. 287 –320. 
Macedo, J. M. 2019. “A Taxonomy of Token Models and Valuation Methodologies,” Medium , , May 
28. (https://medium.com/amazix/a -taxonomy -of-token -models -and-valuation -methodologies -
7b6c0a1d02a9, accessed January 18, 2021).  
Madhwal, Y. 2020. “Implementation of Tokenised Supply Chain Using Blockchain Technology,” in 
2020 IEEE 21st International Symposium on “A World of Wireless, Mobile and Multimedia 
Networks”  (WoWMoM) , August, pp. 66 –67.  
Marshall, L., Repin, A., Tsavliris, C., and Humberstones, C. 2018. “CryptoCompare Cryptoasset 
Taxonomy,” CryptoCompare, October.  
Mooney, A. 2018. Blockchain ‘Could Save Asset Managers $2.7bn a Year.’  
(https://www.ft.com/conte nt/b6171016 -171f-11e8 -9e9c -25c814761640).  
Mueller, L., Glarner, Linder, and Meyer. 2018. “BCP Framework for Assessment of Crypto Tokens - 
MME - Blockchain Crypto Property.”  
Nakamoto, S. 2008. “Bitcoin: A Peer -to-Peer Electronic Cash System,” Original White paper, Manubot.  
Naqvi, N., and Hussain, M. 2020. “Evidence -Based Blockchain: Findings from a Global Study of 
Blockchain Projects and Start -up Companies,” The Journal of The British Blockchain Association  
(3), pp. 1 –13.  
Narayan, R., and Tidström, A. 2020. “Tokenizing Coopetition in a Blockchain for a Transition to 
Circular Economy,” Journal of Cleaner Production  (263), p. 121437.  
OECD. 2020. “The Tokenisation of Assets and Potential Implications for Financial Markets,” OECD 
Blockchain Policy Series, OECD.  
Oliveira, L., Zavolokina, L., Bauer, I., and Schwabe, G. 2018. “To Token or Not to Token: Tools for 
Understanding Blockchain Tokens,” ICIS 2018 Proceedings  
Pilkington, M. 2015. Blockchain Technology: Principles and Applications , Rochester, NY: Social 
Scien ce Research Network.  
Roth, J., Schär, F., and Schöpfer, A. 2019. “The Tokenization of Assets: Using Blockchains for Equity 
Crowdfunding,” SSRN Electronic Journal . 
Savelyev, A. 2018. “Some Risks of Tokenization and Blockchainizaition of Private Law,” Compu ter 
Law & Security Review  (34:4), pp. 863 –869. 
Sazandrishvili, G. 2020. “Asset Tokenization in Plain English,” Journal of Corporate Accounting & 
Finance  (31:2), pp. 68 –73.  
Shtybel, U. 2019. “A New Era of Private Securities: Application of Blockchain in Pr ivate Capital 
Markets Infrastructure,” Journal of Digital Banking  (4:2), pp. 152 –160. 
Strauss, A. L. 1987. Qualitative Analysis for Social Scientists , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.  
Sunyaev, A., Kannengießer, N., Beck, R., Treiblmaier, H., Lacity,  M., Kranz, J., Fridgen, G., 
Spankowski, U., and Luckow, A. 2021. “Token Economy,” Business & Information Systems 
Engineering . 
Webster, J., and Watson, R. T. 2002. “Analyzing the Past to Prepare for the Future: Writing a Literature 
Review,” MIS Quarterly  (2:26).  
Zachariadis, M., Hileman, G., and Scott, S. V. 2019. “Governance and Control in Distributed Ledgers: 
Understanding the Challenges Facing Blockchain Technology in Financial Services,” Information 
and Organization  (29:2), pp. 105 –117.  
Zhou, T., Li, X ., and Zhao, H. 2019. “Med -PPPHIS: Blockchain -Based Personal Healthcare 
Information System for National Physique Monitoring and Scientific Exercise Guiding,” Journal 
of Medical Systems  (43:9), N.PAG -N.PAG.  
Zwicky, F. 1969. Discovery, invention, research t hrough the morphological approach , Macmillan.  
 
 Towa rds a Framework for Understanding Asset Tokenization  
  
Twenty -fifth Pacific Asia Conference on Information Systems, Dubai , UAE, 2021      14  
Archetype
LabelIndustry FocusTokenized 
RepresentationUnderlying  
RepresentationFunction Purpose Unit Tradability Fungibility Supply Technical Setup Driver of TokenizationBarriers for 
Tokenization
Financial & Insurance Activities Currency Digital Means of ExchangePayment 
Tokens Fractional Transferable Fungible Fixed Ledger NativeDemocratization & 
Faciliated AccessLegacy Structures & 
Transition Risk
Money Physical Store of Value Unfixed Ledger Non-Native Increased Liquidity Regulatory & Legal
… Process Optimization Governance Issues
Financial & Insurance Activities Stocks Digital On-Chain Reward Potential Asset Tokens Fractional Transferable Fungible Unfixed Ledger Non-Native Democratization & 
Faciliated AccessLegacy Structures & 
Transition Risk
Bonds Off-Chain Cash Flow & Dividend Increased Liquidity Regulatory & Legal
… Voting Right Increased Transparency Governance Issues
Store of Value Process Optimization
Financial & Insurance Activities Art Physical Off-Chain Cash Flow & Dividend Asset Tokens Fractional Transferable Fungible Unfixed Ledger NativeDemocratization & 
Faciliated AccessRegulatory & Legal
Transport & Storage  Real Estate Store of Value Ledger Non-Native Increased Liquidity Governance Issues
Arts, Entertainment & Recreation … Disintermediation Oracle Problem
Financial & Insurance Activities Equity Digital Off-Chain Cash Flow & Dividend Asset Tokens Fractional Transferable Fungible Unfixed Ledger NativeDemocratization & 
Faciliated AccessLegacy Structures & 
Transition Risk
Debt Contract Store of Value Ledger Non-Native Increased Liquidity Regulatory & Legal
… Voting Right Disintermediation Governance Issues
Increased Transparency
Process  optimization
Financial & Insurance Activities Membership Digital Access to a Service Utility Tokens Fractional Transferable Fungible Fixed Ledger NativeDemocratization & 
Faciliated AccessData Privacy
Prof., Sc. & Technical Activities Discount Contract Whole Non-Fungible Unfixed Ledger Non-Native Increased Transparency Governance Issues
Blockchain-Specific Application … Singleton Process Optimization Oracle Problem
Transport & Storage Digital scarcity
Arts, Entertainment & Recreation
Wholesale & Retail Trade
Information & Commun.
Public Adm. & Defence
Arts, Entertainment & Recreation Governance Digital Access to a Service Utility Tokens Fractional Transferable Fungible Fixed Ledger NativeDemocratization & 
Faciliated AccessData Privacy
Blockchain-Specific ApplicationIncentive 
MechanismContract On-Chain Reward Potential Whole Unfixed Ledger Non-Native Disintermediation Governance Issues
Financial & Insurance Activities Reward Voting Right Singleton Process Optimization
Prof., Scientific & Technical Activities …
Arts, Entertainment & Recreation Identity Digital Collectibles Asset Tokens Whole Non-transferable Non-Fungible Fixed Ledger NativeDemocratization & 
Faciliated AccessData Privacy
Financial & Insurance Activities Classic Cars Contract On-Chain Reward Potential Utility Tokens Singleton Ledger Non-Native Disintermediation Oracle Problem
Information & Commun. Digital Cards Physical Off-Chain Cash Flow & Dividends Digital scarcity
Transport & Storage … Store of Value
Arts, Entertainment & Recreation Artwork Digital Access to a Service Asset Tokens Whole Non-transferable Fungible Fixed Ledger Native Increased Transparency Data Privacy
Financial & Insurance Activities Diamonds Physical Store of Value Utility Tokens Singleton Transferable Non-Fungible Unfixed Ledger Non-Native Process OptimizationLegacy Structures & 
Transition Risk
Blockchain-Specific Application Watches Collectibles Digital scarcity Oracle Problem
Transport & Storage …
Wholesale & Retail TradeDigital 
Sovereignty
Track & 
Tracing Appendix: Tokenization Archetypes 
Programmable 
Money
Smart Bankable 
Assets
Opening of 
Illiquid Assets
Crowd 
Funding
Service 
Access
Platform 
Governance
View publication stats